---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

CHAPTER I.

INDUSTRY.

Private economy--Useful labours--Our birthright--Results of
labour--Necessity for labour--Industry and intellect--Thrift and
civilization--Thrifty industry--Thrifty economy. Pages 1--10

CHAPTER II.

HABITS OF THRIFT.

Workmen and capital--Habits of economy--Self-indulgence--Results of
thriftlessness--Uses of saved money--Extravagant
living--Bargain-buying--Thrift and unthrift--Johnson on
economy--Self-respect--Self-help--Uncertainty of life--Laws of
mortality--Will nobody help us?--Prosperous times the least
prosperous--National prosperity--Moral independence. Pages 11--29

CHAPTER III.

IMPROVIDENCE.

Misery and wealth--The uncivilized--The East End--Edward Denison--Thrift
in Guernsey--Improvidence and misery--Social Degradation--Fatalism of
improvidence--Self-taxation--Slowness of progress. Pages 30--40

CHAPTER IV.

MEANS OF SAVING.

Earnings of operatives--Colliers and iron-workers--Earnings of
colliers--The revellers--Lord Elcho and the colliers--High wages and
heavy losses--High wages and drink--Sensual indulgence--Indifference to
well-being--Hugh Miller's experience--Mr. Roebuck's advice--Survival of
slavery--Extinction of slavery--Power unexercised--Earnings and
character--Ignorance is power--Results of ignorance--Increase of
knowledge--Education not enough--Words of Sir Arthur Helps--Divine uses
of knowledge--Public school education--Words of William Felkin. Pages
41--64

CHAPTER V.

EXAMPLES OF THRIFT.

Spirit of order--Examples of economy--David Hume--Rev. Robert
Walker--Self-application--Distinguished miners--Geo. Stephenson--James
Watt--Working for independence--Working for higher things--Work and
culture--Richardson and Gregory--Results of application--Distinguished
artists--Canova and Lough--John Lough--Lough's success--Words of Lord
Derby--James Nasmyth--Bridgewater foundry--Advice to young men. Pages
65--88

CHAPTER VI.

METHODS OF ECONOMY.

Keeping regular account--Generosity and forethought--Prudent economy--A
dignity in saving--Self-improvement--Causes of failure--The price of
success--Power of combining--Principle of association--Savings of
capital--Loss by strikes--Money thrown away--Industrial
societies--Co-operative companies--Equitable pioneers--Darwen
co-operatives--Spread of co-operation--Thrift conservative--Uses of
investments in building societies. Pages 89--109

CHAPTER VII.

ECONOMY IN LIFE ASSURANCE.

Co-operation in assurance--Improvidence cruel--Compensation of
assurance--Benefit societies--French and Belgian thrift--Workmen's
societies--Manchester Unity--Duty and Dinners--Low rates of
contribution--Failure of friendly societies--Improvement by
experience--Defects will disappear. Pages 110--122

CHAPTER VIII.

SAVINGS BANKS.

Direct saving--Uses of saved money--Beginnings of savings banks--Dr.
Duncan of Ruthwell--Establishment of savings banks--Classes of
Depositors--Magic of drill--Military savings banks--Savings of
soldiers--Soldiers abroad--Deposits in savings banks--Savings at
Bilston--Savings of working men--Penny banks--Charles W.
Sikes--Mechanics' institute banks--The poor man's purse--Depositors in
penny banks--They cultivate prudent habits--Influence of women--Early
lessons in thrift--Belgian Schools--Facilities for saving--Extension of
savings banks--Money order offices--Post office savings banks--Charles
W. Sikes--Lessons of thrift--Mechanics' savings banks--Savings of
artizans--Savings in Preston. Pages 123--158

CHAPTER IX.

LITTLE THINGS.

Luck and labour--Neglect of little things--"It will do!"--Spending of
pennies--The thrifty woman--A helpful wife--A man's daily life--The two
workmen--Rights and habits--Influence of the wife--A penny a day--The
power of a penny--Joseph Baxendale--Pickford and Co.--Roads and
Railways--Business maxims. Pages 159--178

CHAPTER X.

MASTERS AND MEN.

Want of sympathy--Masters and servants--Christian
sympathy--Competition--What capital represents--Workmen and
employers--The Ashworths--New Eagley Mills--Improved workpeople--Public
spirit of manufacturers--Mr. Lister of Bradford--Mr. Foster's
speech--Great men wise savers--Sir Titus Salt--Saltaire--Its
institutions--Music and sobriety--Mr. Akroyd, Halifax--Yorkshire penny
bank--Origin of the bank--How to help the poor--Saving helps
sobriety--Drunkenness put down--"Childish work"--Penny banks. Pages
179--204

CHAPTER XI.

THE CROSSLEYS--MASTERS AND MEN (CONTINUED).

John Crossley--Martha Crossley--A courtship begun--A courtship
concluded--John Crossley begins business--Dean Clough Mill--The Crossley
family--Sir Francis Crossley--Martha Crossley's vow--Halifax People's
Park--Martha's vow fulfilled--Co-operation of colliers--Partnership of
industry--Other co-operative schemes--Jeremiah Head--Newport rolling
mills--Bonuses to workmen--Mr. Carlyle's letter--A contrast--A hundred
years ago--Popular amusements--Improvement of manners--English mechanics
and workmen--English engineers and miners--Swiftness of
machinery--Foreign workmen--Provident habits of foreigners. Pages
205--232

CHAPTER XII.

LIVING BEYOND THE MEANS.

Hypocrisy and debt--Conventionalism--Keeping up appearances--Exclusive
circles--Women and exclusiveness--Women and extravagance--Running into
debt--The temptation of shopkeepers--Temptations to crime--How crime is
committed--Love of dress--Gents--Reckless expenditure--Knowledge of
Arithmetic--Marriage--Happy tempers--Responsibilities of
marriage--Marriage not a lottery--The man who couldn't say "No"--The
courage to say "No"--"Respectable" funerals--Funeral extravagance--John
Wesley's will--Funeral reform. Pages 233--258

CHAPTER XIII.

GREAT DEBTORS.

Greatness and debt--Seedy side of debt--Running up bills--Loan
clubs--Genius and debt--Fox and Sheridan--Sheridan's
debts--Lamartine--Webster--Debts of men of science--Debts of
artists--Italian artists--Haydon--The old poets--Savage and
Johnson--Steele and Goldsmith--Goldsmith's debts--Goldsmith's
advice--Byron's debts--The burden of debt--Burns and Sydney Smith--De
Foe and Southey--Southey and Scott--Scott's debts and labours--Great
poor men--Johnson's advice--Genius and debt--Literary men. Pages
259--285

CHAPTER XIV.

RICHES AND CHARITY.

Helping the helpless--Dr. Donne--Rich people--Love of gold--Eagerness to
be rich--Riches and poverty--Riches in old age--Riches no claim to
distinction--Democrats and riches--Saladin the great--Don Jose de
Salamanca--Compensations of poverty--Honest poverty--Poverty and
happiness--Charity--Evils of money-giving--Philanthropy and
charity--Rich people's wills--Stephen Girard--Thomas Guy--Educational
charities--Peabody's benefaction--Benefactors of the poor--The Navvy's
Home. Pages 286--314

CHAPTER XV.

HEALTHY HOMES.

Healthy existence--Necessity for pure air--The fever tax--The
Arcadians--The rural poor--Influence of the home--Unhealthy
homes--Health and drunkenness--Wholesome dwellings--Edwin
Chadwick--Expectancy of life--The poor laws--The sanitary idea--The
sanitary inquiry--Sanitary commission--Sanitary science--Results of
uncleanness--Losses by ill-health--That terrible Nobody!--Home
reform--Domestic improvement--Cleanliness--Dirt and immorality--Worship
in washing--Knowledge of physiology--Domestic economy--English
cookery--Morals and cookery--Work for ladies--Joseph Corbet's story.
Pages 315--353

CHAPTER XVI.

THE ART OF LIVING.

Art of living exemplified--Taste an economist--Contrasts in cottage
life--Difference in workmen--Living at home--Home and
comfort--Comfortable people--Beneficence of house thrift--Organization
and method--Industry and punctuality--Management of temper--Good
manners--Habitual politeness--French manners--Happiness in good
manners--Amusement--Relaxation--Influence of music--Household
elegance--Elegance of flowers--Common enjoyments--Portraits of great
men--Art at home--Final art of living. Pages 358--378

INDEX 379

A FABLE.

A grasshopper, half starved with cold and hunger, came to a well-stored
beehive at the approach of winter, and humbly begged the bees to relieve
his wants with a few drops of honey.

One of the bees asked him how he had spent his time all the summer, and
why he had not laid up a store of food like them.

"Truly." said he, "I spent my time very merrily, in drinking, dancing,
and singing, and never once thought of winter."

"Our plan is very different," said the bee; "we work hard in the summer,
to lay by a store of food against the season when we foresee we shall
want it; but those who do nothing but drink, and dance, and sing in the
summer, must expect to starve in the winter."

THRIFT.

CHAPTER I.

INDUSTRY.

"Not what I have, but what I do, is my kingdom."--_Carlyle_.

"Productive industry is the only capital which enriches a people, and
spreads national prosperity and well-being. In all labour there is
profit, says Solomon. What is the science of Political Economy, but a
dull sermon on this text?"--_Samuel Laing_.

"God provides the good things of the world to serve the needs of nature,
by the labours of the ploughman, the skill and pains of the artizan, and
the dangers and traffic of the merchant.... The idle person is like one
that is dead, unconcerned in the changes and necessities of the world;
and he only lives to spend his time, and eat the fruits of the earth:
like a vermin or a wolf, when their time comes they die and perish, and
in the meantime do no good."--_Jeremy Taylor_.

"For the structure that we raise,
   Time is with materials filled;
 Our to-days and yesterdays
   Are the blocks with which we build."--_Longfellow_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thrift began with civilization. It began when men found it necessary to
provide for to-morrow, as well as for to-day. It began long before money
was invented.

Thrift means private economy. It includes domestic economy, as well as
the order and management of a family.

While it is the object of Private Economy to create and promote the
well-being of individuals, it is the object of Political Economy to
create and increase the wealth of nations.

Private and public wealth have the same origin. Wealth is obtained by
labour; it is preserved by savings and accumulations; and it is
increased by diligence and perseverance.

It is the savings of individuals which compose the wealth--in other
words, the well-being--of every nation. On the other hand, it is the
wastefulness of individuals which occasions the impoverishment of
states. So that every thrifty person may be regarded as a public
benefactor, and every thriftless person as a public enemy.

There is no dispute as to the necessity for Private Economy. Everybody
admits it, and recommends it. But with respect to Political Economy,
there are numerous discussions,--for instance, as to the distribution of
capital, the accumulations of property, the incidence of taxation, the
Poor Laws, and other subjects,--into which we do not propose to enter.
The subject of Private Economy, of Thrift, is quite sufficient by itself
to occupy the pages of this book.

Economy is not a natural inst
