---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

“I bought this yesterday for my wife; took it out of a little deal in
Trolley,” he told Hopkins, taking a small jewel-box from one of the
desk’s drawers. It contained a diamond ring, somewhat showy, but
obviously quite expensive. Hopkins’s semi-envious admiration made
Gilmartin add, genially: “What do you say to lunch? I feel I am entitled
to a glass of ‘fizz’ to forget my bad luck of this morning.” Then, in
an exaggeratedly apologetic tone: “Nobody likes to lose five hundred
dollars on an empty stomach!”

“She’ll be delighted, of course,” said Hopkins, thinking of Mrs.
Gilmartin. Mrs. Hopkins loved jewelry.

“She’s the nicest little woman that ever lived. Whatever is mine is
hers; and what’s hers is her own. Ha! ha! But,” becoming nicely serious,
“all that I’ll make out of the stock market I’m going to put away for
her, in her name. She can take better care of it than I; and, besides,
she’s entitled to it, anyhow, for being so nice to me.”

That is how he told what a good husband he was. He felt so pleased over
it that he went on, sincerely regretful: “She’s visiting friends
in Pennsylvania or I’d ask you to dine with us.” And they went to a
fashionable restaurant together.

Day after day Gilmartin thought persistently that Maiden Lane was too
far from Wall Street. There came a week in which he could have made four
very handsome “turns” had he but been in the brokers’ office. He was out
on business for his firm and when he returned the opportunity had
gone, leaving behind it vivid visions of what might have been; also the
conviction that time, tide, and the ticker wait for no man. Instead of
buying and selling quinine and balsams and essential oils for Maxwell
& Kip, drug brokers and importers, he decided to make the buying and
selling of stocks and bonds his exclusive business. The hours were easy;
the profits would be great. He would make enough to live on. He would
not let the Street take away what it had given. That was the great
secret: to know when to quit! He would be content with a moderate
amount, wisely invested in gilt-edged bonds. And then he would bid the
Street good-by forever.

Force of long business custom and the indefinable fear of new ventures
for a time fought successfully his increasing ticker-fever. But one day
his brokers wished to speak to him, to urge him to sell out his entire
holdings, having been advised of an epoch-making resolution by Congress.
They had received the news in advance from a Washington customer. Other
brokers had important connections in the Capital and therefore there was
no time to lose. They dared not assume the responsibilty of selling
him out without his permission. Five minutes--five eternities!--passed
before they could talk by telephone with him; and when he gave his order
to sell, the market had broken five or six points. The news was “out.”
 The news agencies’ slips were in the brokers’ offices and half of Wall
Street knew. Instead of being among the first ten sellers Gilmartin was
among the second hundred.

II

The clerks gave him a farewell dinner. All were there, even the head
office-boy to whom the two-dollar subscription was no light matter. The
man who probably would succeed Gilmartin as manager, Jenkins, acted as
toastmaster. He made a witty speech which ended with a neatly turned
compliment. Moreover, he seemed sincerely sorry to bid good-by to the
man whose departure meant promotion--which was the nicest compliment of
all. And the other clerks--old Williamson, long since ambition-proof;
and young Hardy, bitten ceaselessly by it; and middle-aged Jameson, who
knew he could run the business much better than Gilmartin; and Baldwin,
who never thought of business in or out of the office--all told him how
good he had been and related corroborative anecdotes that made him blush
and the others cheer; and how sorry they were he would no longer be with
them, but how glad he was going to do so much better by himself; and
they hoped he would not “cut” them when he met them after he had become
a great millionaire. And Gilmartin felt his heart grow soft and feelings
not all of happiness came over him. Danny, the dean of the office boys,
whose surname was known only to the cashier, rose and said, in the tones
of one speaking of a dear departed friend: “He was the best man in the
place. He always was all right.” Everybody laughed; whereupon Danny went
on, with a defiant glare at the others: “I’d work for him for nothin’ if
he’d want me, instead of gettin’ ten a week from any one else.” And when
they laughed the harder at this he said, stoutly: “Yes, I would!” His
eyes filled with tears at their incredulity, which he feared might be
shared by Mr. Gilmartin. But the toastmaster rose very gravely and said:
“What’s the matter with Danny?” And all shouted in unison: “He’s all
right!” with a cordiality so heartfelt that Danny smiled and sat down,
blushing happily. And crusty Jameson, who knew he could run the business
so much better than Gilmartin, stood up--he was the last speaker--and
began: “In the ten years I’ve worked with Gilmartin, we’ve had our
differences and--well--I--well--er--oh, damn it!” and walked quickly to
the head of the table and shook hands violently with Gilmartin for fully
a minute, while all the others looked on in silence.

Gilmartin had been eager to go to Wall Street. But this leave-taking
made him sad. The old Gilmartin who had worked with these men was no
more and the new Gilmartin felt sorry. He had never stopped to think how
much they cared for him nor indeed how very much he cared for them.

He told them, very simply, he did not expect ever again to spend such
pleasant years anywhere as at the old office; and as for his spells of
ill-temper--oh, yes, they needn’t shake their heads; he knew he often
was irritable--he had meant well and trusted they would forgive him. If
he had his life to live over again he would try really to deserve all
that they had said of him on this evening. And he was very, very sorry
to leave them. “Very sorry, boys; very sorry. _Very_ sorry!” he finished
lamely, with a wistful smile. He shook hands with each man--a strong
grip, as though he were about to go on a journey from which he might
never return--and in his heart of hearts there was a new doubt of the
wisdom of going to Wall Street. But it was too late to draw back.

They escorted him to his house. They wished to be with him to the last
possible minute.

III

Everybody in the drug trade seemed to think that Gilmartin was on
the highroad to Fortune. Those old business acquaintances and former
competitors whom he happened to meet in the street-cars or in the
theatre lobbies always spoke to him as to a millionaire-to-be, in what
they imagined was correct Wall Street jargon, to show him that they too
knew something of the great game. But their efforts made him smile with
a sense of superiority, at the same time that their admiration for his
cleverness and their good-natured envy for his luck made his soul thrill
joyously. Among his new friends in Wall Street also he found much to
enjoy. The other customers--some of them very wealthy men--listened to
his views regarding the market as attentively as he, later, felt it his
polite duty to listen to theirs. The brokers themselves treated him as
a “good fellow.” They cajoled him into trading often--every one hundred
shares he bought or sold meant $12.50 to them--and when he won, they
praised his unerring discernment. When he lost they soothed him by
scolding him for his recklessness--just as a mother will treat her
three-year-old’s fall as a great joke in order to deceive the child into
laughing at its misfortune. It was an average office with an average
clientèle.

From ten to three they stood before the quotation board and watched a
quick-witted boy chalk the price changes, which one or another of the
customers read aloud from the tape as it came from the ticker. The
higher stocks went the more numerous the customers became, being allured
in great flocks to the Street by the tales of their friends, who had
profited greatly by the rise. All were winning, for all were buying
stocks in a bull market. They resembled each other marvelously, these
men who differed so greatly in cast of features and complexion and age.
Life to all of them was full of joy. The very ticker sounded mirthful;
its clicking told of golden jokes. And Gilmartin and the other customers
laughed heartily at the mildest of stories without even waiting for the
point of the joke. At times their fingers clutched the air happily, as
if they actually felt the good money the ticker was presenting to them.
They were all neophytes at the great game--lambkins who were bleating
blithely to inform the world what clever and formidable wolves they
were. Some of them had sustained occasional losses; but these were
trifling compared with their winnings.

When the slump came all were heavily committed to the bull side. It was
a bad slump. It was so unexpected--by the lambs--that all of them said,
very gravely, it came like a thunderclap out of a clear sky. While it
lasted, that is, while the shearing of the flock was proceeding, it
was very uncomfortable. Those same joyous, winning stock-gamblers,
with beaming faces, of the week before, were fear-clutched, losing
stock-gamblers, with livid faces, on what they afterward called the day
of the panic. It really was only a slump; rather sharper than usual.
Too many lambs had been over-speculating. The wholesale dealers in
securities--and insecurities--held very little of their own wares,
having sold them to the lambs, and wanted them back now--cheaper. The
customers’ eyes, as on happier days, were intent on the quotation board.
Their dreams were rudely shattered; the fast horses some had all
but bought joined the steam yachts others almost had chartered. The
beautiful homes they had been building were torn down in the twinkling
of an eye. And the demolisher of dreams and dwellings was the ticker,
that instead of golden jokes was now clicking financial death. They
could not take their eyes from the board before them. Their own ruin,
told in mournful numbers by the little machine, fascinated them. To be
sure, poor Gilmartin said: “I’ve changed my mind about Newport. I guess
I’ll spend the summer on my own _Hotel de Roof!_” And he grinned; but
he grinned alone. Wilson, the dry goods man, who laughed so joyously at
everybody’s jokes, was now watching, as if under a hypnotic spell, the
lips of the man who sat on the high stool beside the ticker and called
out the prices to the quotation boy. Now and again Wilson’s own lips
made curious grimaces, as if speaking to himself. Brown, the slender,
pale-faced man, was outside in the hall, pacing to and fro. All was
lost, including honor. And he was afraid to look at the ticker, afraid
to hear the prices shouted, yet hoping--for a miracle! Gil-martin came
out from the office, saw Brown and said, with sickly bravado: “I held
out as long as I could. But they got _my_ ducats. A sporting life comes
high, I tell you!” But Brown did not heed him, and Gilmartin pushed the
elevator button impatiently and cursed at the delay. He not only had
lost the “paper” profits he had accumulated during the bull market, but
all his savings of years had crumbled away beneath the strokes of the
ticker that day. It was the same with all. They would not take a small
loss at first, but had held on, in the hope of a recovery that would
“let them out even.” And prices had sunk and sunk until the loss was
so great that it seemed only proper to hold on, if need be a year, for
sooner or later prices must come back. But the break “shook them out,”
 and prices went just so much lower because so many people had to sell
whether they would or not.

IV

After the slump most of the customers returned to their legitimate
business--sadder, but it is to be feared not much wiser men. Gilmartin,
after the first numbing shock, tried to learn of fresh opportunities in
the drug business. But his heart was not in his search. There was the
shame of confessing defeat in Wall Street so soon after leaving Maiden
Lane; but far stronger than this was the effect of the poison of
gambling. If it was bad enough to be obliged to begin lower than he had
been at Maxwell & Kip’s, it was worse to condemn himself to long weary
years of work in the drug business when his reward, if he remained
strong and healthy, would consist merely in being able to save a few
thousands. But a few lucky weeks in the stock market would win him back
all he had lost--and more!

He should have begun in a small way while he was learning to speculate.
He saw it now very clearly. Every
