---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

My profession is business. My writing is an incident. "Frenzied Finance"
was set down during the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth hours of busy
days. I pass it up as the history of affairs of which I was a part. The
men who move within the book's pages are still on the turf. A period of
twelve years is covered. So far, eighteen instalments, in all some
400,000 words, have been published. The spigot is still running. I have
written from memory, necessarily. While it is true that fiction is
expressed in the same forms and phrases as truth, no man ever lived who
could shape 400,000 words into the kinds of pictures I have painted and
pass them off for aught but what they were. The character of my palette
made it mechanically impossible to shade or temper the pigments, for the
story was written in instalments, and circumstances were such that often
one month's issue was out to the public before the next instalment was
on paper. Considering all this, the consistency of the chronicle as it
stands is the best evidence of its truth. In submitting it to my readers
I desire to reiterate:

It _is_ truth--of the kind that carries its own bell and candle. Within
the narrative itself are the reagents required to test and prove its
genuineness. Were man endowed with the propensity of a Münchhausen, the
cunning of a Machiavelli, the imagination of Scheherezade, the ability
of a Shakespeare, and the hellishness of his Satanic Majesty, he could
not play upon 400,000 words, or one-quarter that number, and make the
play peal truth for a single hour to the audience who will read this
book, or to one-thousandth part the audience that has already read it in
_Everybody's Magazine_.

Such as the story is, it is before you. If in its perusal you fathom my
intentions, my hopes, my desires, I shall have been repaid for the pain
its writing has brought me. At least you will find the history of a
colossal business affair involving millions of dollars and manned by the
financial leaders of the moment. It is a fair representation of
financial methods and commercial morals as they exist in America at the
beginning of the twentieth century. As a contemporary document the
narrative should have value; as history it is not, I believe, without
interest. As a message it has had its influence. Indeed, it is not an
exaggeration to say that no man in his own generation has seen such a
crop come forth from seed of his own sowing since the long bygone days
when the wandering king planted dragons' teeth on the Phoenician plain
and raised up an army of warriors.

Yours very truly
    Thomas W. Lawson

FOREWORD

There will be set down in this book, in as simple and direct a fashion
as I can write it, the story of Amalgamated Copper and of the "System"
of which it is the most flagrant example. This "System" is a process or
a device for the incubation of wealth from the people's savings in the
banks, trust, and insurance companies, and the public funds. Through its
workings during the last twenty years there has grown up in this country
a set of colossal corporations in which unmeasured success and continued
immunity from punishment have bred an insolent disregard of law, of
common morality, and of public and private right, together with a grim
determination to hold on to, at all hazards, the great possessions they
have gulped or captured. It is the same "System" which has taken from
the millions of our people billions of dollars, and given them over to a
score or two of men with power to use and enjoy them as absolutely as
though these billions had been earned dollar by dollar by the labor of
their bodies and minds. Yet in telling the story of Amalgamated, the
most brazen and voracious maw of this "System," I desire it understood
that I take no issue with men; it is with a principle I am concerned.
With the men I have had close and intimate intercourse, and from my
knowledge of the means they have used, and the manner in which they have
used them, and the causes and effects of their performances, I have no
hesitation in stating that the good they have done, the evils they have
created, and the indelible imprints they have made on mankind are the
products of a condition and not of their individualities, and that if
not one of them had ever been born the same good and evil would to-day
exist. Others would have done what they did, and would have to answer
for what has been done, as they must. So I say the men are merely
individuals; the "System" is the thing at fault, and it is the "System"
that must be rectified. Better far for me not to tell the story I am
going to tell; better far for the victims of Amalgamated not to know who
plundered them and how, than to have them know it only to wreak
vengeance on individuals and overlook the "System," which, if allowed to
continue, surely will in time, a short time, destroy the nation by
precipitating fratricidal war.

The enormous losses, millions upon millions--to my personal knowledge
over a hundred millions of dollars--which were made because of
Amalgamated; the large number of suicides--to my personal knowledge over
thirty--which were directly caused by Amalgamated; the large number of
previously reputable citizens who were made prison convicts--to my
personal knowledge over twenty--directly because of Amalgamated, were
caused by acts of this "System" of which Henry H. Rogers and his
immediate associates were the direct administrators; and yet Mr. Rogers
and his immediate associates, while these great wrongs were occurring,
led social lives which, measured by the most rigid yardstick of mental
or moral rectitude, were as near perfect as it is possible for human
lives to be. As husbands, fathers, brothers, sons, friends, they were
ideal, cleanly of body and of mind, with heads filled with sentiment and
hearts filled with sympathies; their personal lives were like their
homes and their gardens--revealing only the brightest things of this
world, the singing, humming, sweet-smelling things which so strongly
speak to us of the other world we are yet to know. As workers in the
world's vineyards, they labored six days and rested upon the Sabbath,
and gave thanks to Him from whom all blessings flow that He allowed
them, His humble creatures, to have their earthly being. And yet these
men, to whose eyes I have seen come the tears for others' sufferings,
and whose voices I have heard grow husky in recounting the woes of their
less fortunate brothers--these men under the spell of the brutal code of
modern dollar-making are converted into beasts of prey, and put to shame
the denizens of the deep which devour their kind that they may live.

In the harness of the "System" these men knew no Sabbath, no Him; they
had no time to offer thanks, no care for earthly or celestial being;
from their eyes no human power could squeeze a tear, no suffering wring
a pang from their hearts. They were immune to every feeling known to God
or man. They knew only dollars. Their relatives of a moment since, their
friends of yesterday and long, long ago, they regarded only as lumps of
matter with which to feed the whirring, grinding, gnashing mill which
poured forth into their bins--dollars.

In telling the story of Amalgamated I hope to have profited by my long
and intimate study of this cruel, tigerishly cruel "System," so as to be
able to deaden myself to all those human sympathies which I have heard
its votaries so many times subordinate to "It's business." I shall try
only to keep before me how the Indians of the forest, as our forefathers
drove them farther and farther into the unknown West, got bitter
consolation out of the oft-chanted precept of their white brethren of
civilization, "An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth," reminding myself
that whatever of misery or unhappiness my story may bring to the few, it
will be as nothing to that which they have brought to the many.

In asking for the serious, earnest consideration of the public, I shall
be honest in giving to it my qualifications, my motives, and my desires
for writing this narrative. For thirty-four years I have been actively
connected with matters financial. As banker, broker, and corporation
man, I have, from the vantage-point of one who actually handled the
things he studied, studied the causes which created the conditions which
made possible the "System" which produced the Amalgamated affair. In my
thirty-four years of business experience I have seen the great fortunes,
which are the motive power of the "System" referred to, come out of the
far West as specks upon the financial horizon and grow and grow as they
travelled Eastward, until in their length, breadth, and thickness they
obscured the rising sun. At short range I have seen the giant money
machine put together; I have touched elbows with the men who made it, as
they fitted this wheel and adjusted that gear, while at the same time I
broke bread and slept with the every-day people who, with the industry
of the ant and the patience of the spider, toiled to pile in the
pennies, the nickels, and the dimes which have kept the "System's"
hopper full.

At my first meeting with the creators of Amalgamated it was clearly and
distinctly understood that under no circumstances would I enlist in that
"System's" interests other than for such special services as, after due
thought and investigation, I should decide to be such as I could in
fairness to myself and my clients work for; and when I give the details
of this first meeting in my narrative it will be evident to its readers
that in telling the story of Amalgamated I am violating no confidence,
nor in any way encroaching upon the niceties of that business code which
is, and should be, the foundation of all legitimate financial dealings,
nor in any way misusing knowledge which, if acquired under other
circumstances, might be sacred.

Amalgamated was one service the "System" asked of me. It was created
because of my work. It was largely because of my efforts that its
foundation was successfully laid. It was very largely because of what I
stood for and because of the public's confidence in the fulfilment of
the promises I made that the public invested its savings to an extent of
over $200,000,000; and it was almost wholly because of the broken
promises and trickery of the creators of the "System" that the public
lost the enormous sums it did.

My motives for writing the story of Amalgamated are manifold: I have
unwittingly been made the instrument by which thousands upon thousands
of investors in America and Europe have been plundered. I wish them to
know my position as to the past that they may acquit me of intentional
wrong-doing; as to the present that they may know that I am using all my
powers to right the wrongs that have been committed, and as to the
future that they may see how I propose to compel restitution.

My desire in writing the story of Amalgamated, while tinged perhaps with
hatred for and revenge against the "System" as a whole and some of its
votaries, is more truly pervaded with a strong conviction that the most
effective way to educate the public to realize the evils of which such
affairs as the Amalgamated are the direct result, is to expose before it
the brutal facts as to the conception, birth, and nursery-breeding of
this the foremost of all the unsavory offspring of the "System." Thus it
may learn that it is within its power to destroy the brood already in
existence and render impossible similar creations.

In the course of my task I shall describe such parts of the general
financial structure as will place my readers, especially those
unfamiliar with its more complicated conditions, in a mental state to
comprehend the methods by which the savings they think are safely
guarded in the banks, trust and insurance companies, are so manipulated
by the votaries of frenzied finance as to be in constant jeopardy. I
shall show them that while the press, the books, the stump, and our
halls of statesmanship are full to overflowing with the whys,
wherefores, and what-nots of "tariff," "currency," "silver," "gold," and
"labor"; while our market systems are per
