---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

CHAPTER I

THE NATURE, FUNCTIONS, AND CLASSIFICATION OF BANKING INSTITUTIONS

The terms, "bank" and "banking," are applied to institutions and to
businesses which differ considerably in character, functions, and
methods, but which nevertheless have certain common features which
justify their being grouped together. We can best prepare the way for
a discussion of these differences and common features by a description
of the services which these institutions perform in modern society.

_1. Services Performed by Banking Institutions_

From the point of view of their customers these services may be
grouped under the following heads: The safekeeping of money and other
valuables; the making of payments; the making of loans; and the making
of investments. It is a common practice everywhere, and in some
countries, notably the United States, almost a universal practice for
people to intrust their money to banks for safekeeping. To a degree,
hoarding, in the sense of locking up money in private vaults and other
receptacles and keeping it under the eye and in the personal care of
the owner, is still practiced, but it is doubtless on the wane in all
civilized countries. The practice of intrusting to banks the
safekeeping of other valuables, such as important documents, jewelry,
plate, etc., is also widespread and growing.

The service of the safekeeping of money naturally leads to the second,
the making of payments. When we intrust our means of payment to a
bank, it is natural that we should also make it our treasurer and
disbursing agent, and so we do. If we have payments to make to people
at home, in other cities of our own country, or in other countries, we
usually order our bank to perform the service for us.

Loans of almost all kinds are made by banks, and certain kinds,
namely, those to business men for the everyday conduct of commerce and
industry, are made almost exclusively by them. For the most part these
are short-term loans. For long-term loans banks are also one of the
chief resorts, but in some countries these are not to so great a
degree monopolized by them as the short-term variety.

For the investment of the surplus funds of people banks are the chief
agencies. This function takes the form mainly of the sale of stocks,
bonds, and mortgages, and sometimes of the promotion of new
enterprises.

None of these services are performed by banks exclusively. For the
safekeeping of valuables, and sometimes of money, there are in some
places safe deposit companies to which the term "banks" is not
applied. In the making of payments the post office departments of
governments and express companies participate, and in the making of
loans and investments brokers, loan companies, lawyers, etc.,
participate. The peculiarity of banking institutions consists not in
the performance of any one of these services, but in the fact that
they specialize in them all, or in a combination of them. Merely to
keep money and valuables on deposit, or to act as paymaster, or to
make loans, or to sell bonds, stocks, and mortgages would not make an
institution a bank or an individual a banker; but to make a business
of performing most or all of these services for the public involves
the use of certain machinery and certain methods of procedure, and the
assumption of a rôle in the nation's economy which is distinctive and
peculiar, and which has set these institutions apart in every country
as objects of legislation and of scientific treatment, as well as in
the thought and regard of the people.

_2. The Economic Functions of Banks_

Viewed from the standpoint of the nation rather than from that of
individuals, the functions of banks may be described as those of
intermediaries in exchanges and in the investment of capital. In the
former capacity they supply the world with the major part of its
medium of exchange and serve as distributing agents for that portion
of the supply which comes from other sources. They create a medium of
exchange through a process of bookkeeping which is world-wide in
extent, and through which the mutual indebtedness of individuals,
cities, and other subdivisions of countries and nations, brought about
by purchases and sales on credit, are offset without the use of money.

The practice of depositing surplus funds with banks for safekeeping
and consequently of using them as paymasters has resulted in the
reliance of everybody upon banks for currency in any form, and has
thus thrown upon them the responsibility of directly utilizing all the
sources of money supply. Thus while the mints of the United States and
most other countries coin gold bullion, and supply subsidiary silver
and copper and nickel coins to private persons on the same terms as to
banks, as a matter of fact few private persons take advantage of this
privilege, finding it more convenient and profitable to get the coin
they want from banks. The same is true of government notes in
countries in which such notes constitute a portion of the currency.

The accumulation of a nation's capital and its investment require the
cooperation of numerous agencies of which banks are the chief. They
collect the savings of the people, combine them into amounts of
sufficient size for investment purposes, and invest them temporarily
and sometimes permanently. Cooperating agencies in this work are
insurance companies, societies of various kinds for the promotion of
saving, stock exchanges, promoters, etc. Some of these take the place
of banks in the performance of these services, while others supplement
and aid them.

_3. Classification of Banking Institutions_

Banks differ from one another chiefly in the nature and degree of
their specialization, in legal status, and in the place they occupy in
the system to which they belong. Some banks devote the major portion
of their effort to the conduct of exchanges and are called
_commercial_ banks, others to investment banking and are called
_investment_ banks. The most common subclasses under the latter head
are savings banks, land or mortgage banks, and bond houses. Savings
banks specialize in the collection and investment of small savings;
land banks are primarily intermediaries between capitalists and people
who wish to invest capital in land, building operations, and
agriculture; and bond houses are intermediaries between capitalists
and those who wish to invest capital in industrial, commercial, and
transportation enterprises, or loan it to states, cities, or other
public corporations.

Commercial banks rarely confine themselves exclusively to the conduct
of exchanges. Most of them also conduct savings departments and invest
the funds intrusted to them through such departments in agricultural,
industrial, or commercial enterprises or loan them to public
corporations. Commercial banking, however, is their main concern,
their other departments being side issues of greater or less
importance according to circumstances. Investment banks also
frequently carry on commercial banking as a side issue. These two
lines of business are sometimes mixed in such proportions as to render
classification difficult.

From a legal point of view the banks of nearly all countries may be
classified as _private_ or unincorporated, and _incorporated_,
sometimes also called joint-stock banks. Private banks are started by
individuals or firms, like any other private enterprise, without the
formality of application for permission to some public officer, and
without compliance with a set of legally prescribed regulations. They
are subject to the laws of the country governing all kinds of private
business enterprises and sometimes to special laws applying
specifically to them. In some of the states of the United States such
banks are prohibited by law.

Incorporated banks are usually started by private initiative but owe
their actual legal existence and status to a special law, to the
requirements of which they must conform before they are permitted to
do business. Their right to do business is usually evidenced by a
document known as a charter, executed and delivered by a public
officer legally endowed with the requisite authority, or passed in the
form of a law by the legislative organs of the state. Charters of the
latter kind are known as special charters and are rarely used
nowadays, except in the case of institutions of a peculiar character,
endowed with special functions. The central banks of Europe owe their
existence to such charters, as did also the first and second United
States banks. In the early history of the United States special
charters were uniformly employed by the states, but for many years
general incorporation laws have been the rule, on compliance with the
requirements of which persons who desire to incorporate banks can
secure charters.

In federal states, both the federal government and the governments of
the constituent states frequently have and exercise the right to
incorp
