---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

book by the present writer, _Social Value_, published in 1911. That book
grew out of earlier studies in the theory of money, in the course of
which the writer reached the conclusion that the problem of money could
not be solved until an adequate general theory of value should be
developed. The present book thus represents investigations which run
through a good many years, and to which the major part of the past six
years has been given. On the basis of this general theory of value, and
a dynamic theory of money and exchange, our positive conclusions
regarding the value of money are reached. On the same basis, a
psychological theory of credit is developed, in which the laws of credit
are assimilated to the general laws of value.

In a final section, the constructive theory of the book is made the
basis for a "reconciliation" of "statics" and "dynamics" in economic
theory--an effort to bring together the abstract theory of price
(_i. e._, "statics") which has hitherto chiefly busied economists, and
the more realistic studies of economic change (_i. e._ "dynamics") to
which a smaller number of economists have given their attention. These
two bodies of doctrine have hitherto had little connection, and the
science of economics has suffered as a consequence.

This book was not written with the college student primarily in mind.
None the less, I incline to the view that the book, with the exception
of the chapter on "Marginal Utility," is suitable for use as a text with
juniors and seniors in money and banking, if supplemented by some
general descriptive and historical book on the subject, and that the
whole book may very well be used with such students in advanced courses
in economic theory. I think that bankers, brokers, and other business
men who are interested in the general problems of money, trade,
speculation and credit, will find the book of use. Naturally, however,
it is my hope that the special student of money and banking, and the
special student of economic theory will find the book of interest. The
book may interest also certain students of philosophy and sociology, who
are concerned with the applications of philosophy and social philosophy
to concrete problems.

My obligations to others, running through a good many years, are very
great. With Professor E. E. Agger, I talked over very many of the
problems here discussed, in the course of two years of close association
at Columbia University, and gained very much from his suggestions and
criticisms. Professor E. R. A. Seligman has read portions of the
manuscript, and given valuable advice. Professor H. J. Davenport has
given the first draft an exceedingly careful reading, and his criticisms
have been especially helpful. Professor Jesse E. Pope supervised my
investigations in the quantity theory of money in 1904-5, in his seminar
at the University of Missouri, and gave me invaluable guidance in the
general theory of money and credit then. More recently, his intimate
first hand knowledge of European and American conditions, both in
agricultural credit and in general banking, has been of great service to
me. Mr. N. J. Silberling, of the Department of Economics at Harvard
University, has been helpful in various ways, particularly by making
certain statistical investigations, to which reference will be made in
the text, at my request. Various bankers, brokers, and others closely in
touch with the subjects here discussed have been more than generous in
supplying needed information. Among these may be especially mentioned
Mr. Byron W. Holt, of New York, Mr. Osmund Phillips, Editor of the
_Annalist_ and Financial Editor of the _New York Times_, Messrs. L. H.
Parkhurst and W. B. Donham, of the Old Colony Trust Company in Boston,
various gentlemen in the offices of Charles Head & Co., and Pearmain and
Brooks, in Boston, Mr. B. F. Smith, of the Cambridge Trust Company, Mr.
W. H. Aborn, Coffee Broker, New York, Mr. Burton Thompson, Real Estate
Broker, New York, Mr. Jas. H. Taylor, Treasurer of the New York Coffee
Exchange, Mr. J. C. T. Merrill, Secretary of the Chicago Board of Trade,
DeCoppet and Doremus, New York, and Mr. F. I. Kent, Vice President of
the Bankers Trust Company, New York. My greatest obligations are to two
colleagues at Harvard University. Professor F. W. Taussig has given the
manuscript very careful consideration, from the standpoint of style as
well as of doctrine, and has discussed many problems with me in detail.
Professor O. M. W. Sprague has placed freely at my service his rich
store of practical knowledge of virtually every phase of modern money
and banking, and has read critically every page of the manuscript. None
of these gentlemen, of course, is to be held responsible for my
mistakes. I also make grateful acknowledgment of the aid and sympathy of
my wife.

In the course of the discussion, frequent criticisms are directed
against the doctrines of Professors E. W. Kemmerer and Irving Fisher,
particularly the latter, as the chief representatives of the present day
formulation of the quantity theory. Both their theories and their
statistics are fundamentally criticised. I find myself in radical
dissent on all the main theses of Professor Fisher's _Purchasing Power
of Money_, and at very many points of detail. To a less degree, I find
myself unable to concur with Professor Kemmerer. But I should be sorry
if the reader should feel that I fail to recognize the distinguished
services which both of these writers have performed for the scientific
study of money and banking, or should feel that dissent precludes
admiration. I acknowledge my own indebtedness to both, not alone for the
gain which comes from having an opposing view clearly defined and ably
presented, but also for much information and many new ideas. My general
doctrinal obligations in the theory of money and credit are far too
numerous to mention in a preface. My greatest debt in general economic
theory is to Professor J. B. Clark.

                                                 B. M. ANDERSON, JR.

  HARVARD UNIVERSITY, March 31, 1917.

ANALYTICAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

_PART I. THE VALUE OF MONEY AND THE GENERAL THEORY OF VALUE_

CHAPTER I

ECONOMIC VALUE
                                                                  PAGE
  Problem of value of money special case of general theory of
    value; present chapter concerned with general theory             1

  Formal and logical aspects of value: value as quality; value
    as quantity; value and wealth                                  5-6

  Absolute _vs._ relative conceptions of value: value of money
    _vs._ "reciprocal of price-level"; value prior to exchange;
    value and exchangeability; do prices correctly express
    values?                                                       6-12

  Doctrine so far in accord with main current of economic
    opinion                                                      12-14

  Causal theory of value new: marginal utility, labor theory,
    etc., rejected                                               14-16

  Social explanation required: "individual" a social product,
    both in history of individual and in history of race         16-19

  And above individual impersonal psychic forces, law, public
    opinion, morality, economic values                           19-20

  Three types of theory have dealt with these: theory of
    extra-human objective forces; extreme individualism;
    social value theory                                          20-21

  Illustrated in jurisprudence, ethics, and economic theory      21-26

  Law, morals, and economic values generically alike, but have
    _differentiae_                                                26-28

  But not differentiated on basis of states of consciousness
    of individual immediately moved by them, because many
    minds in organic interplay involved                          28-33

  Economic social value (a) of consumers' goods and services:
    "utility" and scarcity; "marginal utility"; social
    explanation of marginal utility; marginal utilities the
    conscious _focus_ of economic values of consumers' goods;
    but only minor part of these values; individuals, classes
    and institutions heavily weighted by legal, moral, and
    other social values, in power over economic values of
    consumers' goods                                             33-38

  Economic social value (b) of labor, land, stocks, bonds,
    "good will," etc.; based only in part on values of
    consumers' goods; partially independent, directly
    influenced by contagion, and centers of power and
    prestige                                                     38-41

  Pragmatic character of theory                                  41-43

  Relation of social values to individual values                 43-45

CHAPTER II

SUPPLY AND DEMAND, AND THE VALUE OF MONEY

  _Hiatus_ between general theory of value and theory of value
    of money                                                     46-47

  Partly because former has been developed by different writers
    from those who have developed latter                         47-49

  But chiefly because supply and demand, cost of production,
    etc., _assume_ fixed value of money, and are theories of
    _price_, rather than _value_                                    49

  Supply and demand useful but superficial formula, common
    property of many value theories
