---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

book on Political Economy, and attempted to mark the completion of the
third cycle of a dozen years each of teaching it, by offering to the
public the present volume? One reason is implied in the title,
"_Principles of Political Economy_." There are three extended
historical chapters in the earlier book, occupying more than
one-quarter of its entire space, which were indeed novel, which cost
me wide research and very great labor, and which have also proven
useful and largely illustrative of almost every phase of Economics;
but I wanted to leave behind me one book of about the same size as
that, devoted exclusively to the Principles of the Science, and using
History only incidentally to illustrate in passing each topic as it
came under review. For a college text-book as this is designed to
become, and for a book of reading and reference for technical
purposes, it seems better that all the space should be taken up by
purely scientific discussion and illustration. This does not mean,
however, that great pains have not been taken in every part to make
this book also easily intelligible, and as readable and interesting as
such careful discussions can be made.

A second reason is, to provide for myself a fresh text-book to teach
from. My mind has become quite too thoroughly familiarized with the
other, even down to the very words, by so long a course of instructing
from it, for the best results in the class-room. Accordingly, a new
plan of construction has been adopted. Instead of the fourteen
chapters there, there are but seven chapters here. Not a page nor a
paragraph as such has been copied from either of the preceding books.
Single sentences, and sometimes several of them together, when they
exactly fitted the purposes of the new context, have been incorporated
here and there, in what is throughout both in form and style a new
book, neither an enlargement nor an abridgment nor a recasting of any
other. I anticipate great pleasure in the years immediately to come
from the handling with my classes, who have always been of much
assistance to me from the first in studying Political Economy, a fresh
book written expressly for them and for others like-circumstanced; in
which every principle is drawn from the facts of every-day life by way
of induction, and also stands in vital touch with such facts (past or
present) by way of illustration.

The third and only other reason needful to be mentioned here is, that
in recent years the legislation of my country in the matter of cheap
Money and of artificial restrictions on Trade has run so directly
counter to sound Economics in their very core, that I felt it a debt
due to my countrymen to use once more the best and ripest results of
my life-long studies, in the most cogent and persuasive way possible
within strictly scientific limits, to help them see and act for
themselves in the way of escape from false counsels and impoverishing
statutes. Wantonly and enormously heavy lies the hand of the national
Government upon the masses of the people at present. But the People
are sovereign, and not their transient agents in the government; and
the signs are now cheering indeed, that they have not forgotten their
native word of command, nor that government is instituted for the
sole benefit of the governed and governing people, nor that the
greatest good of the greatest number is the true aim and guide of
Legislation. I am grateful for the proofs that appear on every hand,
that former labors in these directions and under these motives have
proven themselves to have been both opportune and effective; and I am
sanguine almost to certainty, that this reiterated effort undertaken
for the sake of my fellow-citizens as a whole, will slowly bear
abundant fruit also, as towards their liberty of action as
individuals, and in their harmonious co-operation together as entire
classes to the end of popular comforts and universal progress.

                                                A. L. PERRY.

    WILLIAMS COLLEGE,
      November 25, 1890.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                            PAGE
        CHAPTER I.
    VALUE                                      1

        CHAPTER II.
    MATERIAL COMMODITIES                      80

        CHAPTER III.
    PERSONAL SERVICES                        181

        CHAPTER IV.
    COMMERCIAL CREDITS                       271

        CHAPTER V.
    MONEY                                    361

        CHAPTER VI.
    FOREIGN TRADE                            451

        CHAPTER VII.
    TAXATION                                 540

    INDEX                                    587

PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.

CHAPTER I.

VALUE.

The first question that confronts the beginner in this science, and
the one also that controls the whole scope of his inquiries to the
very end, is: What is the precise subject of Political Economy? Within
what exact field do its investigations lie? There is indeed a short
and broad and full answer at hand to this fundamental and
comprehensive question; and yet it is every way better for all
concerned to reach this answer by a route somewhat delayed and
circuitous, just as it is better in ascending a mountain summit for
the sake of a strong and complete view to circle up leisurely on foot
or on horseback, rather than to dash straight up to the top by a
cog-wheel railway and take all of a sudden what might prove to be a
less impressive or a more confusing view.

The preliminary questions are: What sort of facts has Political
Economy to deal with, to inquire into, to classify, to make a science
of? Are these facts easily separable in the mind and in reality from
other kinds of facts perhaps liable to be confounded with them? Are
they facts of vast importance to the welfare of mankind? And are the
activities of men everywhere greatly and increasingly occupied with
just those things, with which this science has exclusively to do? Let
us see if we cannot come little by little by a route of our own to
clear and true answers for all these questions.

If one should take his stand for an hour upon London Bridge, perhaps
the busiest bit of street in the world, and cast his eyes around
intelligently to see what he can see, and begin also to classify the
things coming under his vision, what might he report to himself and to
others? Below the bridge in what is called the "Pool," which was
dredged out for that very purpose by the ancient Romans, there lie at
anchor or move coming and going many merchant-ships of all nations,
carrying
