---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

CHAPTER I

THE RISE AND FALL OF MAXIM & GAY

The place was New York. The time, March, 1901. My age was thirty. My
cash capital, tightly placed in my pocket, was $7.30, and I had no
other external resources. I was a rover and out of a job.

Since August of the year before I had been loafing. My last position,
seven months before, was that of a reporter for the New Orleans
_Times-Democrat_. My last newspaper assignment was the great Galveston
cyclonic hurricane in which 15,000 lives were lost and $100,000,000 in
property was destroyed. I covered that catastrophe for the New York
_Herald_ and other journals as well as for the New Orleans newspaper.
It was a "beat" and I netted a big sum for a few days' hard work, but
the money had all been spent for subsistence.

At the corner of Fortieth Street and Broadway I met an old-time
racetrack friend, Dave Campbell. His face wore a hardy, healthful hue,
but he bore unmistakable evidence of being down on his luck.

"Buy me a drink," he said.

"I've got thirty cents in change and I must have a cigar," I answered,
"and you know I like good ones."

"Well, I'll take a beer," he said, "and you can buy yourself a
perfecto."

No sooner said than done. The cigar and the drink were forthcoming. We
sat down. It was a café with the regulation news-ticker near the lunch
counter.

"Do you still bet on the horses?" asked Campbell.

"No, I haven't had a bet down in more than a year," I answered.

"Well, here's a letter I just received from Frank Mead at New Orleans,
and it ought to make you some money," he said.

"There's a 'pig' down here named Silver Coin," the letter said, "that
has been raced for work recently. I think he's fit and ready and that
within the next few days they will place him in a race that he can
win, and he will bring home the coonskins at odds of 10 to 1."

I had seen letters like that before, but my interest was aroused. I
picked up a copy of the New York _Morning Telegraph_ from the table.
Turning the pages, I noticed a number of tipsters' advertisements, all
claiming they were continually giving the public winners on the races.

THE BIRTH OF AN IDEA TO COIN MONEY

"Do these people make money?" I asked Campbell.

"Yes, they must," he answered, "because the ads have been running
every day for months and months."

"Well, if poorly written ads like these can make money, what would
well-written ads accomplish, and particularly from an information
bureau which might give real information?" I queried. A moment later
the ticker began its click, click, click.

"Here come the entries," said Campbell.

He went to the tape and ejaculated, "By Jiminy! Here's Silver Coin
entered for to-morrow."

The coincidence stirred me.

"I've got an idea for an advertisement," I said. "Get me a sheet of
paper."

It was supplied. I wrote:

    +---------------------------+
    |  Bet Your Last Dollar On  |
    |      SILVER COIN          |
    |          To-day           |
    |      At New Orleans       |
    |  He Will Win At 10 to 1   |
    +---------------------------+

And then I faltered. "I must have a name for the signature," I said.

I picke
