---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

These changes in prices are nearly always due to a feverish and excited
market. The stocks themselves do not actually vary in real value. They
are worth a certain sum all the time. They are paying dividends on that
sum and the stocks at their real value are always a good investment.
Yet by the manipulations of the speculators and on account of the
exigencies of these Wall Street marginal gamblers such stocks can be
bought at times at a fraction of their value, and by reason of the same
causes can be sold at other times for far more than they are really
worth.

_The men who make the money in Wall Street are those who know what
stocks are really worth and who buy when prices, go down and sell when
they go up,_ buying and selling the same stocks over and over again,
and making a handsome profit on every transaction. They do not care how
low a stock they hold goes for the reason that the stock belongs to
them, they know what it is actually worth as a dividend payer, and in
the skyrocket performances of the speculators of the Street they take
no interest except as it gives them opportunities to buy and sell. They
do not care how high a stock goes; they have no shortages to cover, but
can simply sit back and sell as much of their holdings as they choose
whenever they see an opportunity to make a big turn.

Such men will turn a block of stock in a given corporation over and
over dozens of times in the course of a year, making so much money on
it that even if the stock should disappear off the face of the earth
altogether, they would still be far ahead on it, simply on account of
the numerous advances and declines.

By owning stocks in a large number of good, sound corporations, they
will average to make a certain sum of money every day in the year. They
spread their invested capital over a wide field in this manner, and the
laws of average make them sure gainers at every stage of their
operations.

_This is, as you will observe, very similar to the principles upon
which the great life insurance companies are managed._

Many of these commenced business starting with but a few thousand
dollars, and they now have assets of millions. They have piled up this
enormous wealth by insuring the lives of human beings.

Every company which has not succeeded has failed because it did not
issue a certain number of policies.

_The secret of success is the large number of risks reducing the
chance to a minimum._

No life insurance company could succeed if it insured but a few lives.

By the law of average, insurance companies can tell just how many of
the people they insure will die each year.

When you make an application for life insurance the first question they
will ask is your age, and by referring to their tables they can tell
you the month and day when you will die. Now, you may not actually die
upon that day, but you do theoretically, and the point is that they
have so many risks that the law of average, always prevailing, in the
end brings everything out just as figured.

The fact that one person lives longer than the date when his life
should end is offset by the fact that another person dies sooner than
expected, and thus the law of average is absolutely maintained.

The postal authorities could not come anywhere near telling how many
letters would be mailed in the City of New York on a certain day, but
they can come with remarkable closeness to the average for a year in
advance, and predict with certainty how many people will write letters
and forget to address them during that time.

_It is by the working out by the law of average as best exemplified
by the insurance business that it is possible to work out a plan by
which Wall Street stocks can be dealt in with absolute safety and
certain profit._

Of course, no man or company could purchase one hundred shares of stock
without the risk of a loss. That is to say, no man should make a
purchase of this kind unless he is in a position to buy again and again
many times over and still hold all that he has previously purchased.

Buying a certain quantity of stock in one corporation is very much like
an insurance company insuring the life of one man. But when you buy
thousands of shares of stock in various corporations, some stocks going
up and some going down, the law of average is an absolute protection
and the statistics of stock fluctuations for the past twenty-five years
show beyond the possibility of doubt that this is true.

The fluctuations in the prices of good, dividend paying stocks are
something remarkable. _Some active stocks show a fluctuation of five
thousand times their value in a year, thus offering a continual
opportunity for money making._

These are the stocks which are constantly speculated upon, the stocks
on which so much money is lost and upon which the cool headed and
careful operators make so much.

The Western Union Telegraph Company's shares have always paid 5%
dividend, and the average market price has been about 90, making the
income about 5-1/2. Now, suppose it is purchased in ten-share blocks on
every one per cent. decline and none sold above the average price, it
will show an income of more than 43% per annum, besides some dividends.

_Suppose the very worst were to happen and there was a 20 point
decline in Western Union, then we would have_

    10 shares at 90             $900
    10    "   "  89              890
    10    "   "  88              880
    10    "   "  87              870
    10    "   "  86              860
    10    "   "  85              850
    10    "   "  84              840
    10    "   "  83              830
    10    "   "  82              820
    10    "   "  81              810
    10    "   "  80              800
    10    "   "  79              790
    10    "   "  78              780
    10    "   "  77              770
    10    "   "  76              760
    10    "   "  75              750
    10    "   "  74              740
    10    "   "  73              730
    10    "   "  72              720
    10    "   "  71              710
    10    "   "  70              700
                             -------
      Total Investment       $16,800

It will be seen that $16,800 will handle a ten-share lot of Western
Union Telegraph through a regular "Black Friday" panic, with a
resulting investment as stated above. It must be borne in mind that the
average prices of these purchases is 80, giving a dividend of 6% on the
investment, but when the market has resumed its normal condition (90),
the profits will be $2,100, exclusive of dividends.

If lots of 100 shares each were purchased, there would be profits of
$21,000 exclusive of dividends.

_The shares of the American Sugar Refining Company fluctuate 4,900
times their par value every year, and our method applied to them will
give a profit of from 200 to 300% per annum, exclusive of
dividends._

While we refer to the possibilities in making investments in Western
Union and American Sugar Company's shares, we include in our operations
a number of different securities, all at the same time.

For instance, when we would purchase one hundred shares of one stock,
we divide it into five or ten different lots and do the same thing in,
say, ten or twenty different stocks all at the same time; therefore,
instead of having on hand a few large lots, we have two or three
hundred small lots, purchased down to the lowest prices, and by
purchasing outright a large quantity in little "lots" at different
prices, the average cost eliminates the risk of loss and insures
certain profits.

According to the results of speculation and manipulation, the twenty
different stocks that we deal in do not usually all go down at the same
time. Some are going up, while others are going down; therefore, we are
receiving profits in one, while making advantageous investments in
another.

_We have been established in Wall Street for a number of years, and
we know about the various stocks on the market, their value and earning
capacity._ We know the stocks which are most sought after by
investors, and the stocks which are used by speculators to make money
out of the public.

We now offer to the public the best plan for a legitimate investment
speculation. We have an authorized issue of $500,000 debenture bonds
due and payable in three years, with interest at 5%, payable
semi-annually, for the purpose of buying and selling stocks and
securities as dealt in upon the stock exchanges of New York.

_In consideration of one-half of the net profits accruing from these
investments we guarantee the bonds and interest at the rate of 5%, and
conduct, manage and direct the business._

We distribute the net proceeds on the first of every month, one-half to
the bondholders and one-half to our company.

These bonds are issued in sums of $25 and upwards, as purchasers may
direct, and are transferable only upon the books of the company.

_The first thing to be sought is absolute safety in investment._
Only sound, dividend paying securities will be bought and only at a
bargain when it is known beyond question that the price is below their
actual earning power. Having purchased and paid for the securities the
bondholders become the owners of them, and they will be placed in our
vaults until such time as they can be sold at a handsome profit.

_No get-rich-quick methods will be used, and no speculation indulged
in._

No large amount of money will ever be tied up in one stock.

The operations will be spread over a large amount of ground, making
small investments in proper securities, thus practically eliminating
all risk of loss. It is more certain than life insurance business.

The chances of loss will be considerably smaller than they would be in
banking, manufacturing or mercantile enterprises.

Purchases will commence when a stock is over-depressed and evidently
selling below its real value.

Purchases will continue so long as the price continues to go down.

These stocks will then be held and we will have every advantage over
the market, instead of the market having the slightest advantage over
us, as it does over ninety-nine out of a hundred speculators.

_When the speculator is forced to sell at a low price we begin to
buy._

When he is forced to buy at a high price we will be ready to sell.

We have the advantage over the market at every stage of the game.

The market cannot force us to do anything because we are in a position
to do precisely as we please.

_This business is strictly cash, buying for cash and selling for
cash, trading in securities of strong, dividend paying corporations and
going steadily forward every business day in the year._

No credit will be extended or asked.

There will be no bad debts.

No money has to be expended for plant, equipment or other costly things
which figure in ordinary lines of business.

_Every cent of money will keep working all the time, and such of it
as is not invested will be drawing interest in a Trust Company._

There will be absolutely nothing to worry about.

When we want to buy other people are unloading. They have been frozen
out and have to sell.

The more freezing out there is, the more panicky things get, the better
it is for us.

There is more money to be made in one panicky day than there is in
weeks of ordinary Wall Street trading.

Then, on the other hand, when everything is looking first-rate and
prosperous, Wall Street is full of people who want to buy. There is
where we are ready for them again.

We bought the stocks w
