---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

book a larger circulation than it possessed heretofore, as the natural
conclusion would be that it might injure my business. I feel, however,
that it is not so, and think that a broker loses nothing by doing his
duty in warning his clients against danger, and showing them the pitfalls.

I do not quite agree with the author of the book on every point,
especially when he seeks to convey the impression that it would seem
almost impossible that any profit could be derived from Stock Exchange
speculation. During my long experience I have seen many speculators
accumulate large fortunes, and I believe that when speculation is
conducted by a clear-headed man, as a matter of business and not as a
matter of amusement, it offers great chances.

Where the strength of Mr. Crump’s work lies is in his showing what
attributes of character a man must possess to be successful, and with
these attributes a man must prove successful in stock speculation as well
as in any other business. Condensed, these attributes are: first, a clear
head; second, capital; and third, patience.

I do not agree with Mr. Crump, that a speculator, to be successful,
must be a hard-hearted, selfish man. I found it different with most of
the prominent men in Wall Street. Of course, if a Gould or a Vanderbilt
buys up a whole railroad, he cannot very well take many people into
his confidence; but these men are not what is generally called
speculators—they are generals or diplomats, and they are not different in
their actions from generals in warfare or diplomats in politics.

Outside of this class, I found generally, when I asked one of the
prominent speculators for his opinion of the market, that he gave
me his true and candid opinion of the future of the market; and the
probabilities are that, if even not acting on this opinion at that very
moment, his general policy was based on such a forecast of the market’s
condition.

The strength of the successful speculator lies in his observing the
important principle set forth by Mr. Crump on page 60 of his work.
“Speculators never set sufficient value on the importance of avoiding a
loss—they think only of the profits.” As it is with our money affairs
when we say, “_Look after the pence; the pounds will take care of
themselves_,” so it is with speculation. Look after the losses; the
profits will take care of themselves. Never refuse a profit, is a golden
motto for speculators, which unhappily few of them, in their greediness,
have the courage to adopt. The observance of this rule is the main cause
of the success of the best speculators, and the non-observance is the
cause of failure of even their confidential friends.

Very few fortunes have been made in Wall Street at one stroke. Fortunes
which were made in that way were generally lost again in a very short
time. Most of the long, lasting, and solid fortunes were made by a
gradual accumulation of profits extending over a great many years. The
beginnings of these were sometimes quite small, and, as the capital
increased, larger operations were entered into.[1]

Another cause of failure is the habit of taking larger risks than the
means of speculators warrant. They naturally become nervous when they
begin to see their capital dwindle away, and then begin, what is called
in Wall Street, to “chip out.” Now this is the curse of the speculator,
not so much on account of the loss, as on account of the demoralization
it will lead him into. Of course, big losses ought to be avoided, but
at the same time well based and matured operations may sometimes be
temporarily upset by a temporary manipulation of the market, or by some
accidents which however right themselves in a few days, and cannot
seriously interrupt the natural course of the market. In such a market a
nervous speculator may “chip out” a fortune, and still be right in his
views as to general conditions.

I think it is better to make one loss of 5 per cent. or so, when you
know you are wrong, than to make three or five losses of 1 per cent.
each, when you do not know whether you are wrong or right, and in this
connection Mr. Crump has very much undervalued the importance of options.

Options, if considered in their proper light, are the most important
adjunct to speculation. They will enable the speculator to bridge over
many difficulties, and furnish capital to speculators who know how to use
them.

I do not say this simply because I am a broker in options, but because
it is my honest conviction that options are cheap at almost any price,
when a speculator has occasion to use them. If money is lost by buyers
of options, it is because many of them are bought by people who have not
sufficient reasons for doing so, and after the option has been bought,
the owner does not know what to do with it. I have, for example, known
people to be bulls on Lake Shore, and then go and spend money for a put
in Western Union. Is it any wonder that men who do business on such
principles lose money?

That many stock brokers object to options is natural. They look out for
commissions, and greatly prefer to buy and sell several times a day on
stop orders or on margins, even if customers lose money thereby, rather
than see them make money two or three times a year, through operations
extended over periods of two or three months each.

I do not mean to say that all stock brokers are of this kind, but
if speculators recall their own experience, they will undoubtedly
remember how often their broker said to them, “Cut your losses,” if the
transaction was against them, while, if the transaction showed a profit,
the advice was, “Taking profits will never make any man poorer.” All
these things make commissions for the broker, and this is the object of
his business.

Another reason for the unwillingness of some brokerage houses to
encourage speculation against options must be found in the fact that a
great many of them have not sufficiently large capital to enter upon
large transactions without any other margin than the option. Although I
acknowledge that it is hardly fair to ask a broker to do an unlimited
amount of business based on options alone, the fact, nevertheless, exists
that the strongest houses have always been glad to encourage trading
against options, and only the more insignificant houses are opposed to it.

A well planned and matured operation, looking far ahead, backed by ample
capital and patience, is the only way to make a fortune at the Stock
Exchange, and prudence demands that in case the speculator’s idea should
have been wrong, he should have a safe way for a retreat open. Options
will fulfill all these demands; and no matter how expensive, if the
speculator can afford it, it is the only way of speculating in a safe and
reasonable manner.

There are some people who are under the impression that they know
everything already, and have nothing to learn, and such may be amused,
but not benefited, by reading this book; others, however, who are
inclined to speculate (and there are and always will be many of them)
cannot fail to derive great benefit from the perusal of Mr. Crump’s
interesting work, and I hope I may put money in some people’s pockets
or save others from ruin by sending this book forth among the American
people.

                                                         H. W. ROSENBAUM.

NEW YORK, NOV., 1886.

The last chapter in Mr. Crump’s book, entitled “Outside Criticism on the
Causes of Disturbance in the Money Market,” has been omitted in this
edition, as it relates simply to questions about the policy of the Bank
of England in regard to regulating the discount rate, and a controversy
and correspondence on this point between Mr. Crump and Mr. Bonamy Price.

As this whole question is of no practical value or interest to the
American reader, I thought it expedient to omit the whole matter.

                                                                 H. W. R.

CONTENTS.

                                                                     PAGE

                                CHAPTER I.

                       _Technical Terms Explained._

     1. Jobbers and Brokers                                             19

     2. The Bull                                                        19

     3. The Bear                                                        19

     4. Contango                                                        20

     5. Backwardation                                                   24

     6. Options                                                         26

     7. The “Put and Call” Option                                       26

     8. The “Put” Option                                                26

     9. The “Call” Option                                               26

    10. The Fortnightly Settlement                                      27

    11. Speculation by Members of the House                             28

                                CHAPTER II.

       _The Importance of Special Knowledge regarding the Regularly
               Recurring Causes that influence the Markets._

     1. The Temper of the Public                                        32

     2. Meteorological Influences                                       32

     3. A Favorable Period of the Year                                  35

     4. Causes affecting the Value of English Railway Stocks            36

     5. The Course to pursue at the Turn of the Half-year               36

     6. Second Half of the Year more favorable for Bear Operations      37

     7. Activity among Buyers                                           39

     8. The Bull Speculator’s Great Chance                              39

     9. The great importance of being now and again altogether
          Clear of the Markets                                          40

    10. The Movement of Prices near the Settlements                     41

                               CHAPTER III.

          _The Right Temperament for a Professional Speculator._

     1. Cool-headedness an indispensable Condition of Success           43

     2. The Uselessness of Haphazard Speculation                        45

     3. Accurate Foresight                                              45

     4. The Cool Man, or Professional Speculator                        46

     5. Observance of the daily published Telegrams from abroad         46

     6. The Selfishness and Hard-heartedness of the Professional
          Speculator                                                    48

     7. The Non-professional or Haphazard Speculator                    50

     8. The Misfortune of Early Gains                                   55

     9. Very few Failures made Public                                   57

    10. Greediness involves Loss                                        60

    11. Keeping one’s own Counsel                                       60

                                CHAPTER IV.

            _The Increase of Speculation in Stocks and Shares._

     1. Stock Exchange Gambling increases in Europe, while Public
          Gaming-Houses are on the decline                              62

     2. Speculation an Out-growth of prosperous times                   63

     3. Commercial prosperity unhealthily fostered by Illegitimate
          Speculation                                                   64

     4. The Influence of Trade Profits upon the Stock Markets           64

     5. An increase in the amount of Trade Profits realized, causes
     an Increase in the number of Securities                            65

     6. Speculation by Established Companies                            66

     7. The Demoralization caused by Temporary Success                  66

     8. The New Era in Speculation                                      67

     9. Collapse through Over-speculation in Austria                    67

    10. Increase in the number of Members of the London Stock
     Exchange                                                           68

                                CHAPTER V.

                   _Modern Influences upon the Markets._

     1. A Fixed Line of Action                                          71

     2. Closer Uniformity of Values in all Markets through the
          Development of the Telegraph System                           72

     3. A speculator cannot hope to succeed in any degree, unless
          his arrangements are as complete as those of a man
          engaged in _bona fide_ business                               73

     4. The Diminution of Gluts in all Markets                          73

     5. Modern conditions render it more difficult than formerly
          for Small Mercantile Houses to succeed                        73

     6. Every Commercial Revulsion destroys Houses of a Speculative
          character, and throws the good business into the
          hands of the large sound Establishments                       75

     7. The Extension of Long-wire Telegraphy                           78

     8. Money Famines should henceforth be as improbable of
          occurrence as Corn Famines                                    78

     9. Advantages derived from opening up communications with
          the Corn-growing Provinces of Russia                          80

    10. The Growth of Wealthy Monetary Centres                          82

    11. Private Cipher Telegrams as exterior influences upon Prices     83

    12. The Altered Character of interior influences upon Prices        84

    13. The Creation of Securities to meet the Demand                   84

    14. Getting behind the Scenes
