---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

I                1
     II               14
    III               30
     IV               39
      V               55
     VI               67
    VII               80
   VIII               87
     IX              100
      X              117
     XI              131
    XII              144
   XIII              160
    XIV              173
     XV              190
    XVI              199
   XVII              215
  XVIII              230
    XIX              238
     XX              245
    XXI              257
   XXII              273
  XXIII              293
   XXIV              304

_I_

I went to work when I was just out of grammar school. I got a job
as quotation-board boy in a stock-brokerage office. I was quick at
figures. At school I did three years of arithmetic in one. I was
particularly good at mental arithmetic. As quotation-board boy I
posted the numbers on the big board in the customers’ room. One of the
customers usually sat by the ticker and called out the prices. They
couldn’t come too fast for me. I have always remembered figures. No
trouble at all.

There were plenty of other employes in that office. Of course I made
friends with the other fellows, but the work I did, if the market was
active, kept me too busy from ten A.M. to three P.M. to let me do much
talking. I don’t care for it, anyhow, during business hours.

But a busy market did not keep me from thinking about the work. Those
quotations did not represent prices of stocks to me, so many dollars
per share. They were numbers. Of course, they meant something. They
were always changing. It was all I had to be interested in--the
changes. Why did they change? I didn’t know. I didn’t care. I didn’t
think about that. I simply saw that they changed. That was all I had to
think about five hours every day and two on Saturdays: that they were
always changing.

That is how I first came to be interested in the behaviour of prices.
I had a very good memory for figures. I could remember in detail how
the prices had acted on the previous day, just before they went up or
down. My fondness for mental arithmetic came in very handy.

I noticed that in advances as well as declines, stock prices were apt
to show certain habits, so to speak. There was no end of parallel cases
and these made precedents to guide me. I was only fourteen, but after
I had taken hundreds of observations in my mind I found myself testing
their accuracy, comparing the behaviour of stocks to-day with other
days. It was not long before I was anticipating movements in prices. My
only guide, as I say, was their past performances. I carried the “dope
sheets” in my mind. I looked for stock prices to run on form. I had
“clocked” them. You know what I mean.

You can spot, for instance, where the buying is only a trifle better
than the selling. A battle goes on in the stock market and the tape is
your telescope. You can depend upon it seven out of ten cases.

Another lesson I learned early is that there is nothing new in Wall
Street. There can’t be because speculation is as old as the hills.
Whatever happens in the stock market to-day has happened before and
will happen again. I’ve never forgotten that. I suppose I really manage
to remember when and how it happened. The fact that I remember that way
is my way of capitalizing experience.

I got so interested in my game and so anxious to anticipate advances
and declines in all the active stocks that I got a little book. I
put down my observations in it. It was not a record of imaginary
transactions such as so many people keep merely to make or lose
millions of dollars without getting the swelled head or going to the
poorhouse. It was rather a sort of record of my hits and misses, and
next to the determination of probable movements I was most interested
in verifying whether I had observed accurately; in other words, whether
I was right.

Say that after studying every fluctuation of the day in an active stock
I would conclude that it was behaving as it always did before it broke
eight or ten points. Well, I would jot down the stock and the price
on Monday, and remembering past performances I would write down what
it ought to do on Tuesday and Wednesday. Later I would check up with
actual transcriptions from the tape.

That is how I first came to take an interest in the message of the
tape. The fluctuations were from the first associated in my mind with
upward or downward movements. Of course there is always a reason for
fluctuations, but the tape does not concern itself with the why and
wherefore. It doesn’t go into explanations. I didn’t ask the tape why
when I was fourteen, and I don’t ask it to-day, at forty. The reason
for what a certain stock does to-day may not be known for two or three
days, or weeks, or months. But what the dickens does that matter? Your
business with the tape is now--not to-morrow. The reason can wait. But
you must act instantly or be left. Time and again I see this happen.
You’ll remember that Hollow Tube went down three points the other day
while the rest of the market rallied sharply. That was the fact. On the
following Monday you saw that the directors passed the dividend. That
was the reason. They knew what they were going to do, and even if they
didn’t sell the stock themselves they at least didn’t buy it. There was
no inside buying; no reason why it should not break.

Well, I kept up my little memorandum book perhaps six months. Instead
of leaving for home the moment I was through with my work, I’d jot down
the figures I wanted and would study the changes, always looking for
the repetitions and parallelisms of behaviour--learning to read the
tape, although I was not aware of it at the time.

One day one of the office boys--he was older than I--came to me where I
was eating my lunch and asked me on the quiet if I had any money.

“Why do you want to know?” I said.

“Well,” he said, “I’ve got a dandy tip on Burlington. I’m going to play
it if I can get somebody to go in with me.”

“How do you mean, play it?” I asked. To me the only people who
played or could play tips were the customers--old jiggers with oodles
of dough. Why, it cost hundreds, even thousands of dollars, to get
into the game. It was like owning your private carriage and having a
coachman who wore a silk hat.

“That’s what I mean; play it!” he said. “How much you got?”

“How much you need?”

“Well, I can trade in five shares by putting up $5.”

“How are you going to play it?”

“I’m going to buy all the Burlington the bucket shop will let me carry
with the money I give him for margin,” he said. “It’s going up sure.
It’s like picking up money. We’ll double ours in a jiffy.”

“Hold on!” I said to him, and pulled out my little dope book.

I wasn’t interested in doubling my money, but in his saying that
Burlington was going up. If it was, my note-book ought to show it.
I looked. Sure enough, Burlington, according to my figuring, was
acting as it usually did before it went up. I had never bought or sold
anything in my life, and I never gambled with the other boys. But all I
could see was that this was a grand chance to test the accuracy of my
work, of my hobby. It struck me at once that if my dope didn’t work in
practice there was nothing in the theory of it to interest anybody. So
I gave him all I had, and with our pooled resources he went to one of
the near-by bucket shops and bought some Burlington. Two days later we
cashed in. I made a profit of $3.12.

After that first trade, I got to speculating on my own hook in the
bucket shops. I’d go during my lunch hour and buy or sell--it never
made any difference to me. I was playing a system and not a favorite
stock or backing opinions. All I knew was the arithmetic of it. As a
matter of fact, mine was the ideal way to operate in a bucket shop,
where all that a trader does is to bet on fluctuations as they are
printed by the ticker on the tape.

It was not long before I was taking much more money out of the bucket
shops than I was pulling down from my job in the brokerage office. So I
gave up my position. My folks objected, but they couldn’t say much when
they saw what I was making. I was only a kid and office-boy wages were
not very high. I did mighty well on my own hook.

I was fifteen when I had my first thousand and laid the cash in front
of my mother--all made in the bucket shops in a few months, besides
what I had taken home. My mother carried on something awful. She wanted
me to put it away in the savings bank out of reach of temptation. She
said it was more money than she ever heard any boy of fifteen had made,
starting with nothing. She didn’t quite believe it was real money. She
used to worry and fret about it. But I didn’t think of anything except
that I could keep on proving my figuring was right. That’s all the fun
there is--being right by using your head. If I was right when I tested
my convictions with ten shares I would be ten times more right if I
traded in a hundred shares. That is all that having more margin meant
to me--I was right more emphatically. More courage? No! No difference!
If all I have is ten dollars and I risk it, I am much braver than when
I risk a million, if I have another million salted away.

Anyhow, at fifteen I was making a good living out of the stock market.
I began in the smaller bucket shops, where the man who traded in twenty
shares at a clip was suspected of being John W. Gates in disguise or
J. P. Morgan traveling incognito. Bucket shops in those days seldom
lay down on their customers. They didn’t have to. There were other
ways of parting customers from their money, even when they guessed
right. The business was tremendously profitable. When it was conducted
legitimately--I mean straight, as far as the bucket shop went--the
fluctuations took care of the shoestrings. It doesn’t take much of a
reaction to wipe out a margin of only three quarters of a point. Also,
no welsher could ever get back in the game. Wouldn’t have any trade.

I didn’t have a following. I kept my business to myself. It was a
one-man business, anyhow. It was my head, wasn’t it? Prices either
were going the way I doped them out, without any help from friends
or partners, or they were going the other way, and nobody could stop
them out of kindness to me. I couldn’t see where I needed to tell my
business to anybody else. I’ve got friends, of course, but my business
has always been the same--a one-man affair. That is why I have always
played a lone hand.

As it was, it didn’t take long for the bucket shops to get sore on me
for beating them. I’d walk in and plank down my margin, but they’d
look at it without making a move to grab it. They’d tell me there
was nothing doing. That was the time they got to calling me the Boy
Plunger. I had to be changing brokers all the time, going from one
bucket shop to another. It got so that I had to give a fictitious name.
I’d begin light, only fifteen or twenty shares. At times, when they got
suspicious, I’d lose on purpose at first and then sting them proper.
Of course after a while they’d find me too expensive and they’d tell
me to take myself and my business elsewhere and not interfere with the
owners’ dividends.

Once, when the big concern I’d been trading with for months shut down
on me I made up my mind to take a little more of their money away
from them. That bucket shop had branches all over the city, in hotel
lobbies, and in near-by towns. I went to one of the hotel branches
and asked the manager a few questions and finally got to trading. But
as soon as I played an active stock my especial way he began to get
messages from the head office asking who it was that was operating. The
manager told me what they asked him and I told him my name was Edward
Robinson, of Cambridge. He telephoned the glad news to the big chief.
But the other end wanted to know what I looked like. When the manager
told me that I said to him, “Tell him I am a short fat man with dark
hair and a bushy beard!” But he described me instead, and then he
listened and his face got red and he hung up and told me to beat it.

“What did they say to you?” I asked him politely.

“They said, ‘You blankety-blank fool, didn’t we tell you to take no
business from Larry Livingston? And you deliberately let him trim us
out of $700!’” He didn’t say what else they told him.

I tried the other branches one after another, but they all got to know
me, and my money wasn’t any good in any of their offices. I couldn’t
even go in to look at the quotations without some of the clerks making
cracks at me. I tried to get them to let me trade at long intervals by
dividing my visits among them all. But that didn’t work.

Finally there was only one left to me and that was the biggest and
richest of all--the Cosmopolitan Stock Brokerage Company.

The Cosmopolitan was rated as A-1 and did an enormous business. It
had branches in every manufacturing town in New England. They took
my trading all right, and I bought and sold stocks and made and lost
money for months, but in the end it happened with them as usual. They
didn’t refuse my business point-blank, as the small concerns had. Oh,
not because it wasn’t sportsmanship, but because they knew it would
give them a black eye to publish the news that they wouldn’t take a
fellow’s business just because that fellow happened to make a little
money. But they did the next worse thing--that is, they made me put
up a three-point margin and compelled me to pay a premium at first
of a half point, then a point, and finally, a point and a half. Some
handicap, that! How? Easy! Suppose Steel was selling at 90 and you
bought it. Your ticket read, normally: “_Bot ten Steel at 90⅛._” If you
put up a point margin it meant that if it broke 89¼ you were wiped out
automatically. In a bucket shop the customer is not importuned for more
margin or put to the painful necessity of telling his broker to sell
for anything he can get.

But when the Cosmopolitan tacked on that premium they were hitting
below the belt. It meant that if the price was 90 when I bought,
instead of making my ticket: “_Bot Steel at 90⅛_,” it read: “_Bot
Steel at 91⅛_.” Why, that stock could advance a point and a quarter
after I bought it and I’d still be losing money if I closed the trade.
And by also insisting that I put up a three-point margin at the very
start th
