---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

CHAPTER I

THE FUNCTIONS OF THE STOCK EXCHANGE

Every now and then some one who has not given much thought to the
matter asks the questions, “Of what real use is the Stock Exchange?”
“What does it accomplish?” “Is it a necessary and useful part of our
economic life, or is it merely a means of promoting speculation and
gambling?” These are fair questions, and they are asked in good faith.
To be sure they have been answered many times by writers on economic
subjects, but the trouble is that in our hurried American life we do
not read the economists, preferring to get our impressions from the
hasty utterances of some one who knows no more about it than we do.

The study of any form of economic development, like the study of
sciences and philosophies, requires infinite patience. But the “man
in the street” is bored to death by such methods; he wants to take a
short cut to his conclusions; merely tasting the Pierian spring he
hurries on to judgments that are superficial, haphazard, and often
crude and blundering. And yet at bottom this man, a good citizen with
an open mind, invariably wants the truth. He may be too busy to dig it
up himself, but he knows it when he sees it, and once he has grasped
it he has no patience with those who seek to turn him from it. To this
average man, who holds in his hands the balance of power in America, I
venture to say something about markets.

The first thing a man asks when he wishes to buy is “the price.” Every
minute of the day, all over the world, that question is on men’s lips.
As it is a necessary prelude to all forms of trade, it follows that
everything that enters into the making of prices becomes at once of
primary importance. The more scientific the price, and the nicer and
more accurate the making of it, the better the bargain for both buyer
and seller and for trade generally, bearing in mind the distinction
between prices, which are temporary and move rapidly--and values, which
are intrinsic and move slowly. The price of a thing is what you can
get for it; the value is its real worth to you, and hence it cannot be
defined or measured, since a thousand considerations may enter into
it, such as caprice, sentiment or association. If _real_ values could
be determined, they would necessarily be identical with prices, but as
they cannot be ascertained in ordinary commodities of trade, prices
become the really essential considerations and values the subordinate
ones. Let us see, then, how prices are made, for this is one of the
reasons why exchanges exist.

If you want to buy, let us say, a piano, you go to the dealer and ask
the price, and as he is the only person in the neighborhood who deals
in pianos, you must either accept his offer or look elsewhere. But
to look elsewhere takes time and labor; dealers in pianos are widely
separated; moreover, there is no open competition among them such as
you would like, and so finally when you have bought you feel perhaps
you have not secured your money’s worth. You would have secured a much
better bargain, no doubt, had there been twenty dealers in the room
competing with each other, and a still better bargain had their number
been fifty, or a hundred, or two hundred, because that would mean
competition, and the more competition there is, in close contact and
governed by rigid business rules, the more certain the approach to a
perfect price. Everywhere in the world fairs and other gatherings of
merchants are held at periodic intervals because people demand them
in their effort to secure proper prices by competitive bidding and
offering. One of the first travelers to penetrate the heart of Africa
found among the natives this phenomenon of trade, showing that it is
instinctive; indeed, it may be traced to the earliest known period
in the history of any people. If you arise before daybreak in London
and go to Billingsgate and Covent Garden, or in Paris to the _Halles
Centrales_--Zola’s “Ventre de Paris”--you will find there the modern
type of these markets in their utmost perfection.[1]

This is why Exchanges exist, not only Stock Exchanges, but
market-places of all kinds: Buyers seek the largest market they can get
in order to obtain the lowest prices; sellers, in order to obtain the
highest prices; and so it was learned long ago that economy of time and
labor, as well as a theoretically perfect market, could be best secured
by an organization under one roof of as many dealers in a commodity as
could be found.[2] Bear in mind that this result, moreover, is best
accomplished when the organization is so controlled by rigid rules of
business morality as to insure to every one who does business there,
great and small, rich and poor, an absolutely square deal. In such a
market every purchase is made with the most thorough acquaintance with
the conditions involved. Each dealer, each broker, each speculator,
strives to obtain the best knowledge of the supply and demand, and
the earliest news that may affect it, and each buyer or seller has an
equal and a fair opportunity to profit by the resultant effect on the
market of all these various agencies. The larger the body of brokers
and traders, then, the more accurate the standards of value thus
created. It is a pity you could not have bought your piano under such
conditions.[3]

Demagogues have set the agricultural classes against Wall Street and
against Exchanges, but producers everywhere, in default of exchanges,
are forming quasi-exchanges of their own. Every day we hear of
combinations, Farmers’ Alliances, rural co-operative movements, etc.,
each designed to regulate the market for eggs, butter, potatoes, and
such things, and each having for its purpose the very functions which
govern a Stock Exchange in its own field--namely, the establishment of
a fair price under the nearest possible approach to ideal conditions.
It is now proposed in Congress that the Department of Agriculture
shall collect and transmit to the agricultural districts by telephone
and telegraph all available information concerning price movements,
markets, and centres of supply and demand, this again embodying the
essential functions performed in its own field by a great exchange.

In practice, of course, there can be no exchange to deal in perishable
products of the farm, and this is a pity, because if such an exchange
were practicable we should hear less of our old friend the cost of
living. Why? Because at present the market for these commodities is
controlled by commission dealers and by middlemen. The producer and the
consumer are alike at the mercy of these people; the price is fixed by
them; the number of bona fide dealers actually bidding against each
other is limited, in many instances there is no competition whatever;
the producer and the commission dealer are, moreover, widely separated;
the man who sells has few sources of information, and it is the
business of the dealer who buys to see that he gets none; the small
producer therefore has to submit to a great inequality in price, and
often to downright cheating. There is no standard. There are no rules
governing the dealer, and no high-minded board to enforce his honesty.
Naturally this sort of thing contributes to the cost of living, since
the commission dealer, on his part, regulates his profits just in
proportion to the ignorance, cupidity or remoteness of the farmer,
while the middlemen, of whom there are sometimes three or four, apply
the same iniquitous processes to the ultimate purchaser--who happens
to be you or me. Every thinking man knows that this is rank economic
error.[4]

A friend of mine owns a thousand-acre farm in the Shenandoah Valley,
where he raised this year 10,000 baskets of peaches. He decided to seek
one buyer, and he found him in the person of a Baltimore canner, who
went down to Virginia, inspected the crop, and contracted for the lot
on a basis of $1 for firsts, 70 cents for seconds, and 40 cents for
thirds, delivered at Baltimore. Shortly after, the market was flooded
with peaches from Georgia, and the Baltimore man, seeing that the
crop would be plentiful, promptly “welched” on his trade, basing his
action on the absurd contention that “firsts” should be three inches in
diameter, although as every one knows peaches of this size are almost
never to be had. This action threw all the grower’s peaches into third
class, which delivered at Baltimore would have netted him about 10
cents a basket.

In desperation he looked elsewhere, West, North, and South, only
to hear the same monotonous answer from commission men, “we won’t
buy, but we will handle your crop on a commission of 10 per cent.”
Meantime the crop was ripening. To make matters worse the railroad
levied a prohibitive price, and refrigerator cars were not to be had.
Finally there was nothing left but to ship by express and trust to the
commission men to treat him honestly. The final accounting showed that
on his first shipment he netted 5½ cents a basket, and on his second,
15 cents, not counting the expense of picking, packing, and hauling.
So much for the producer. The consumer fared no better, for he had to
pay $1.25 per basket for this fruit; one of this producer’s friends
actually purchasing a portion of this very consignment at that rate.
The difference therefore between 15 cents and $1.25 contributes some
food for thought as to the cost of living.[5]

Now contrast this experience of a grower having no exchange facilities
with that of the Western farmer who deals directly with a Grain
Exchange. The farmer can sell his crop, even though it has not been
planted. Whenever he sells, and under whatever conditions, he enjoys
the authoritative establishment of a price, fixed as clearly as matters
are fixed in law. Moreover, the price at which he elects to sell is the
best price, the fairest price, and the most scientific price that human
agencies can arrive at, because it is made by world-wide competitive
bidding at the hands of skilled men in Chicago, in New York, in
Liverpool, in Berlin, in Odessa, and in the Argentine, all competing by
cable and telegraph. Think of the confidence he enjoys, and the liberty
of action; think, too, what it means to him to know that the Exchange
through which he deals is a body of honorable men, governed by rules,
bidding publicly under one roof.

But, you will say, this is all very well in its application to a grain
or cotton exchange, but how does it apply to the Stock Exchange? You
concede that scientific price-making for commodities like grain and
cotton is highly necessary, but you do not see that the same necessity
exists for stocks and bonds. You feel, no doubt, that the one has to
do with food and raiment and is therefore indispensable, while the
other merely serves to stimulate speculation and gambling, and hence
is altogether unnecessary. Now, in order to explain the error in this
point of view, let us first see how bits of paper, called securities,
came into being.

Long after Europe had emerged from the dark centuries following
the fall of the Roman Empire, the needs of states and governments
impelled their rulers to resort to credit, and it was discovered that
the simplest way to do it was to issue securities, that is to say,
certificates of the debt. Next, it was found that in order to insure
success for these operations, a market was required. Intermittent or
temporary sources from which credit could be obtained was not enough;
constant sources of credit were essential, and, as these _constant_
sources lay in the savings of the people, public markets in which
investors could tell the value of their investments from day to day
followed as a natural course.[6]

As time went on--necessarily the evolution was gradual--it was learned
that companies having to do with all forms of business enterprises
might also be formed on the same basis. The development of the world’s
business outgrew its infancy days of private partnerships, and
corporate organization of necessity took their place, now that the
discovery o
