---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

CHAPTER I

THE CONSEQUENCES TO SOCIETY OF CHANGES IN THE VALUE OF MONEY

Money is only important for what it will procure. Thus a change in
the monetary unit, which is uniform in its operation and affects all
transactions equally, has no consequences. If, by a change in the
established standard of value, a man received and owned twice as much
money as he did before in payment for all rights and for all efforts,
and if he also paid out twice as much money for all acquisitions and
for all satisfactions, he would be wholly unaffected.

It follows, therefore, that a change in the value of money, that is to
say in the level of prices, is important to Society only in so far as
its incidence is unequal. Such changes have produced in the past, and
are producing now, the vastest social consequences, because, as we all
know, when the value of money changes, it does _not_ change equally for
all persons or for all purposes. A man’s receipts and his outgoings are
not all modified in one uniform proportion. Thus a change in prices and
rewards, as measured in money, generally affects different classes
unequally, transfers wealth from one to another, bestows affluence here
and embarrassment there, and redistributes Fortune’s favours so as to
frustrate design and disappoint expectation.

The fluctuations in the value of money since 1914 have been on a scale
so great as to constitute, with all that they involve, one of the most
significant events in the economic history of the modern world. The
fluctuation of the standard, whether gold, silver, or paper, has not
only been of unprecedented violence, but has been visited on a society
of which the economic organisation is more dependent than that of any
earlier epoch on the assumption that the standard of value would be
moderately stable.

During the Napoleonic Wars and the period immediately succeeding them
the extreme fluctuation of English prices within a single year was 22
per cent; and the highest price level reached during the first quarter
of the nineteenth century, which we used to reckon the most disturbed
period of our currency history, was less than double the lowest and
with an interval of thirteen years. Compare with this the extraordinary
movements of the past nine years. To recall the reader’s mind to the
exact facts, I refer him to the table on the next page.

I have not included those countries--Russia, Poland, and Austria--where
the old currency has long been bankrupt. But it will be observed
that, even apart from the countries which have suffered revolution
or defeat, no quarter of the world has escaped a violent movement. In
the United States, where the gold standard has functioned unabated, in
Japan, where the war brought with it more profit than liability, in the
neutral country of Sweden, the changes in the value of money have been
comparable with those in the United Kingdom.

INDEX NUMBERS OF WHOLESALE PRICES EXPRESSED AS A PERCENTAGE OF 1913 (1).

 +-----------------------------------+--------------------------------+
 |Monthly Average.                   |U.S.A. (3).                     |
 |       |United Kingdom (2).        |     |Canada.                   |
 |       |     |France.              |     |      |Japan.             |
 |       |     |      |Italy.        |     |      |     |Sweden.      |
 |       |     |      |     |Germany.|     |      |     |      |India.|
 +-------+-----+----- +-----+--------+-----+----- +-----+----- +------+
 |1913   | 100 |  100 | 100 |     100| 100 | 100  | 100 |  100 |   .. |
 |1914   | 100 |  102 |  96 |     106|  98 | 100  |  95 |  116 |  100 |
 |1915   | 127 |  140 | 133 |     142| 101 | 109  |  97 |  145 |  112 |
 |1916   | 160 |  189 | 201 |     153| 127 | 134  | 117 |  185 |  128 |
 |1917   | 206 |  262 | 299 |     179| 177 | 175  | 149 |  244 |  147 |
 |1918   | 227 |  340 | 409 |     217| 194 | 205  | 196 |  339 |  180 |
 |1919   | 242 |  357 | 364 |     415| 206 | 216  | 239 |  330 |  198 |
 |1920   | 295 |  510 | 624 |   1,486| 226 | 250  | 260 |  347 |  204 |
 |1921   | 182 |  345 | 577 |   1,911| 147 | 182  | 200 |  211 |  181 |
 |1922   | 159 |  327 | 562 |  34,182| 149 | 165  | 196 |  162 |  180 |
 |1923[A]| 159 |  411 | 582 | 765,000| 157 | 167  | 192 |  166 |  179 |
 +-------+-----+----- +-----+--------+-----+----- +-----+----- +------+

(1) These figures are taken from the _Monthly Bulletin of Statistics_
of the League of Nations. (2) _Statist_ up to 1919; thereafter the
median of the _Economist_, _Statist_, and Board of Trade Index Numbers.
(3) Bureau of Labour Index Number (revised).

        [A] First half-year.

From 1914 to 1920 all these countries experienced an expansion in
the supply of money to spend relatively to the supply of things to
purchase, that is to say _Inflation_. Since 1920 those countries which
have regained control of their financial situation, not content with
bringing the Inflation to an end, have contracted their supply of money
and have experienced the fruits of _Deflation_. Others have followed
inflationary courses more riotously than before. In a few, of which
Italy is one, an imprudent desire to deflate has been balanced by the
intractability of the financial situation, with the happy result of
comparatively stable prices.

Each process, Inflation and Deflation alike, has inflicted great
injuries. Each has an effect in altering the _distribution_ of wealth
between different classes, Inflation in this respect being the worse of
the two. Each has also an effect in overstimulating or retarding the
_production_ of wealth, though here Deflation is the more injurious.
The division of our subject thus indicated is the most convenient for
us to follow,--examining first the effect of changes in the value of
money on the distribution of wealth with most of our attention on
Inflation, and next their effect on the production of wealth with most
of our attention on Deflation. How have the price changes of the past
nine years affected the productivity of the community as a whole, and
how have they affected the conflicting interests and mutual relations
of its component classes? The answer to these questions will serve to
establish the gravity of the evils, into the remedy for which it is the
object of this book to inquire.

I.--CHANGES IN THE VALUE OF MONEY, AS AFFECTING DISTRIBUTION

For the purpose of this inquiry a triple classification of Society
is convenient--into the Investing Class, the Business Class, and the
Earning Class. These classes overlap, and the same individual may earn,
deal, and invest; but in the present organisation of society such a
division corresponds to a social cleavage and an actual divergence of
interest.

1. _The Investing Class._

Of the various purposes which money serves, some essentially depend
upon the assumption that its real value is nearly constant over
a period of time. The chief of these are those connected, in a
wide sense, with contracts for the _investment of money_. Such
contracts--namely, those which provide for the payment of fixed sums
of money over a long period of time--are the characteristic of what it
is convenient to call the _Investment System_, as distinct from the
property system generally.

Under this phase of capitalism, as developed during the nineteenth
century, many arrangements were devised for separating the management
of property from its ownership. These arrangements were of three
leading types: (1) Those in which the proprietor, while parting with
the management of his property, retained his ownership of it--_i.e._
of the actual land, buildings, and machinery, or of whatever else
it consisted in, this mode of tenure being typified by a holding
of ordinary shares in a joint-stock company; (2) those in which he
parted with the property temporarily, receiving a fixed sum of _money_
annually in the meantime, but regained his property eventually, as
typified by a lease; and (3) those in which he parted with his real
property permanently, in return either for a perpetual annuity fixed in
terms of money, or for a terminable annuity and the repayment of the
principal in money at the end of the term, as typified by mortgages,
bonds, debentures, and preference shares. This third type represents
the full development of _Investment_.

Contracts to receive fixed sums of money at future dates (made without
provision for possible changes in the real value of money at those
dates) must have existed as long as money has been lent and borrowed.
In the form of leases and mortgages, and also of permanent loans
to Governments and to a few private bodies, such as the East India
Company, they were already frequent in the eighteenth century. But
during the nineteenth century they developed a new and increased
importance, and had, by the beginning of the twentieth, divided
the propertied classes into two groups--the “business men” and the
“investors”--with partly divergent interests. The division was not
sharp as between individuals; for business men might be investors
also, and investors might hold ordinary shares; but the division was
nevertheless real, and not the less important because it was seldom
noticed.

By this system the active business class could call to the aid of their
enterprises not only their own wealth but the savings of the whole
community; and the professional and propertied classes, on the other
hand, could find an employment for their resources, which involved them
in little trouble, no responsibility, and
