---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          Transcriber’s Note:

This version of the text cannot represent certain typographical effects.
Italics are delimited with the ‘_’ character as _italic_.

Footnotes were lettered, beginning with ‘a’, on each page. They have
been numerically resequenced for uniqueness and moved to follow the
paragraphs in which they are referenced.

There was an Errata included in the text. The corrections listed there
were made.

Minor errors, attributable to the printer, have been corrected. Please
see the transcriber’s note at the end of this text for details regarding
the handling of any textual issues encountered during its preparation.

                                   AN
                                INQUIRY
                                INTO THE
                   PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL OECONOMY:

                                BEING AN

                          ESSAY ON THE SCIENCE

                                   OF

                    Domestic Policy in Free Nations.

                  IN WHICH ARE PARTICULARLY CONSIDERED

               POPULATION, AGRICULTURE, TRADE, INDUSTRY,
               MONEY, COIN, INTEREST, CIRCULATION, BANKS,
                  EXCHANGE, PUBLIC CREDIT, AND TAXES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                     By Sir _JAMES STEUART_, Bart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 _Ore trahit quodcumque potest atque addit acervo._ HOR. Lib. I. Sat. 1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               _VOL._ II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                LONDON:
          Printed for A. MILLAR, and T. CADELL, in the Strand.

                               ----------

                               MDCCLXVII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                CONTENTS
                                 OF THE
                             SECOND VOLUME.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

                               BOOK III.

                           OF MONEY AND COIN.

                                PART II.

               The principles of Money applied to trade.

 CHAP. I. Consequences of imposing the price of coinage, and the  Page
   duty of seigniorage, upon the coin of a nation, in so far as      1
   they affect the price of bullion, and that of all other
   commodities,

     Intricacy of this subject,                                      2

     Recapitulation of some principles,                              —

     The first introduction of coinage must make prices fall         3

     Consequences of the exclusive privilege of coining,             4

     A wrong balance of trade raises the price of bullion to the     5
     value of coin,

     And ought to raise proportionally the price of commodities,     —

     How traders obstruct the operation of this principle, while     6
     the balance of trade continues fluctuating,

     And how an overturned balance of trade attaches prices to       7
     the denominations of coin,

     How profits consolidate into prime cost,                        8

     And are preserved upon articles of home consumption,            9

     But are torn away by foreign competition, for articles of       —
     exportation,

     How this hurts the industrious, and how the state may          10
     indemnify them,

 CHAP. II. Concerning the influence which the imposing the price    11
   of coinage, and the duty of seigniorage, in the English mint,
   will have upon the course of exchange, and trade of Great
   Britain,

     Theory of prices upon articles of exportation,                  —

     How the course of exchange is regulated,                       13

     Price of exchange, what?                                        —

     Where coinage is free, the price of bullion ought to be         —
     invariable,

     And fluctuating where coinage is imposed,                       —

     Bullion in England dearer than in France,                      14

     Because the price of it is kept up by the mint,                 —

     And is allowed to fall in France 8 _per cent._ below the        —
     coin,

     This a wise regulation,                                         —

     England loses by this sometimes 8 _per cent._ upon her         15
     trade with France,

     And at a medium 4 _per cent._ as is proved by a matter of      17
     fact,

     Easy to be verified at all times by the price of bullion       18
     and course of exchange in the Paris market,

     When bullion is exported to England, exchange is against        —
     France,

     Course of exchange no rule for judging of the balance of        —
     trade, but only of the value of coin,

     The real par not to be calculated by the intrinsic value of    19
     the coin, unless bills were drawn in weight of fine
     bullion,

     OBJ. Exchange _regulates_ the price of bullion,                20

     ANSW. Denied: Exchange only _raises_ its price, the mint        —
     price _pulls it down_,

     _Balance upon the real par_ no mark of _a balance_ upon         —
     trade, proved by examples,

     Balance of trade, what?                                        21

     The real par of exchange to be fixed by the fluctuating         —
     value of the coin, not by the permanent quantity of the
     bullion it contains,

     Proof of this proposition,                                     22

     Application of these principles to the English trade with      24
     France,

 CHAP. III. Is the loss which the course of exchange marks upon     25
   the trade of Great Britain with France, real or apparent,

     Reason for proposing this question,                             —

     Suppositions,                                                   —

     Principles,                                                    25

     How the paying for coinage affects the profits on goods        26
     _exported_,

     When the balance is favourable,                                27

     And how, when unfavourable,                                    28

     How the paying for coinage affects the profits on goods         —
     _imported_,

     When the balance is favourable,                                 —

     And how, when unfavourable,                                     —

     The more trade is favourable, the more adviseable it is to     29
     impose a price upon coinage,

 CHAP. IV. Of the different methods of imposing coinage, and of     30
   the influence they respectively have upon the value of the
   money unit, and upon the domestic interests of a nation,

     Two ways of imposing coinage,                                   —

     Plan laid down in this chapter,                                31

     How coinage is imposed by authority,                            —

     How by consent,                                                 —

     When by authority, what the consequence,                        —

     The metals are exported,                                        —

     How, in France, this is prevented in some measure,             32

     French policy as to coin not generally understood,              —

     How coinage influences the price of inland commodities,        33

     A case not to be resolved by this theory, but left to be        —
     verified by experiment,

     An objection answered,                                          —

     Coinage affects the price of bullion immediately, and that     34
     of commodities indirectly,

     Consequence of the price of coinage, when imposed with          —
     consent,

     That bullion is brought to the mint, when trade is             35
     favourable,

     How the mint price of the metals may be allowed to vary,       36

     Influence of this method of imposing coinage, on the price     37
     of commodities, and value of the pound sterling,

 CHAP. V.  How an experiment may be made to discover with           38
   certainty the real effects of the imposition of coinage,

     Plan of the experiment proposed,                               39

     The consequence of this will be, to recall the old guineas      —
     from abroad,

     During this experiment a close attention must be had to the    40
     rate of prices,

     And if they vary how to discover the true cause,                —

     Farther consequences of this experiment,                        —

     Can we estimate the wealth of a nation by the quantity of      42
     its coin?

     Just as we can estimate a man’s estate by the weight of his    43
     purse,

 CHAP. VI. Miscellaneous questions and observations concerning      44
   the doctrine of money and coin,

     The use of a miscellaneous chapter at the end of a subject,     —

     QUEST. 1. Why does the doctrine of money appear so             45
     intricate?

     ANSW. Because it is perplexed with jargon,                      —

     The denominations of coin are confounded with the intrinsic     —
     value,

     The terms metal, money, coin, bullion, and price, are all      46
     considered as synonimous,

     What is meant by _metal_? what by _money_? what by _coin_?      —
     what by _bullion_? what by _price_?

     Of the abuse of the terms _rising_ and _sinking_, and of        —
     the inaccuracy of speech,

     Prices attached to the denominations of coin,                  47

     _Coinage raises the value of coin_, is a more proper            —
     expression, than _coinage sinks the price of commodities_,

     How to avoid such ambiguities of speech,                        —

     A case which cannot be resolved by this theory,                 —

     In speaking we do not distinguish between pure metal, and      48
     that which is mixed with alloy,

     Of the abuse of terms relative to denominations of coins,      49

     This illustrated by an example,                                 —

     Farther obscurities from the abuse of language,                 —

     How to avoid such abuse,                                       50

     QUEST. 2. What is the difference between raising the value      —
     of coin, by imposing coinage, and raising the denomination
     of it?

     ANSW. The first is real, and affects foreign nations; the       —
     other does not,

     Proved by an example,                                          51

     How the arbitrary method of raising the denominations of        —
     coin affects prices at home,

     QUEST. 3. How will the imposition of coinage affect the        53
     creditors of Great Britain?

     ANSW. If they continue to be paid by denominations, they        —
     will gain; if by weight of metal, they will not gain, nor
     will they lose,

     Proved by an example,                                           —

     How the imposition of coinage advances the credit of           54
     France,

     QUEST. 4. Is the plan we have proposed effectual towards        —
     preserving the pound sterling invariable?

     ANSW. No: but seems to be the best relative to material         —
     money,

     A scale of value realized in metal never can be exact;          —
     because the metal itself varies in its value,

     1. From the manufacturing of it. 2. From the interest of       55
     money. 3. From the manners of a people,

     The only exact scale of value is that which can measure the     —
     metals like every other commodity,

     Explanation of this proposition, by an example,                 —

     And by an application, to the bank of Amsterdam,               56

     How the locking up the coin in that bank renders the value      —
     of it more stable,

     QUEST. 5. Will not the imposition of coinage in England        57
     frequently stop the mint?

     ANSW. Certainly: when the balance of trade is unfavourable,     —

     But this is an advantage to England which France now           58
     enjoys,

     The coin of France passes in other nations above its value      —
     as a metal, and returns to France unmelted,

     QUEST. 6. Is not this return a loss to France?                  —

     Intricacy of this question,                                    59

     Resolution of it,                                               —

     It is no loss to France,                                       60

     Another view of this question,                                  —

     QUEST. 7. If by overrating gold the English lose their         61
     silver, why should not France by overrating silver lose her
     gold?

     ANSW. Because the English rate their gold above the value       —
     of it in their own market. The French do not so with their
     silver,

     How the proportion of the metals is kept nearly the same in    62
     all European markets?

     Because when home demand disturbs the proportion, foreign       —
     trade brings it even again,

     Coins of gold and silver should be proportioned at the rate    63
     of the market at home,

     And nations cannot fix that proportion by any convention        —
     among themselves,

     Why is the proportion of the metals so different in Europe      —
     and in Asia?

     Answer to this,                                                 —

     QUEST. 8. Is it the interest of Princes to debase the          64
     standard of their coin?

     ANSW. It is their immediate interest when they are debtors,     —
     and it is their interest to raise it when creditors; but
     always unjust,

     Who are debtors and who creditors; and how Princes who         65
     incline to rob their subjects may avoid robbing themselves
     at the same time,

     Example of a Prince who is now employing this engine            —
     against his enemies, not his subjects,

     Writers against this practice have used wrong arguments to     66
     dissuade Princes from it,

     The proper arguments against it are three,                     67

     1. It disturbs the ideas of people with regard to value,        —

     2. It either robs the class of debtors, or creditors,           —

     3. It ruins credit,                                             —

     This last circumstance will probably put an end to the          —
     practice,

     QUEST. 9. What is the best form to be given to coin?            —

     Difference between medals and coins,                            —

     Of indenting the impression,
