---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

THE
                                 THEORY
                                   OF
                           MORAL SENTIMENTS;
                                  OR,
                                AN ESSAY
                                TOWARDS
 An ANALYSIS of the PRINCIPLES by which MEN naturally judge concerning
the CONDUCT and CHARACTER, first of their NEIGHBOURS, and afterwards of
                              THEMSELVES.
                           TO WHICH IS ADDED,
                             A DISSERTATION
                                 ON THE
                          ORIGIN OF LANGUAGES.

                      BY ADAM SMITH, L.L.D. F.R.S.

   Formerly Professor of Philosophy in the University of Glasgow; and
        Author of the Nature and Cause of the Wealth of Nations.

                           THE SIXTH EDITION.

                                DUBLIN:

       Printed for J. BEATTY and C. JACKSON, No. 32, SKINNER-ROW.

                             M,DCC,LXXVII.

                               CONTENTS.

                                 PART I.

 Of the Propriety of Action.

                               SECTION I.

 Of the sense of propriety                                          Page
                                                                      1.

 CHAP. I. _Of Sympathy_                                            ibid.

 CHAP. II. _Of the Pleasure of mutual Sympathy_                        9

 CHAP. III. _Of the manner in which we judge of the propriety or
   impropriety of the affections of other men, by their concord or
   dissonance with our own_                                           14

 CHAP. IV. _The same subject continued_                               19

 CHAP. V. _Of the amiable and respectable virtues_                    27

                               SECTION II.

 Of the degrees of the different passions which are consistent
   with propriety                                                     33

 CHAP. I. _Of the passions which take their origin from the body_     34

 CHAP. II. _Of those passions which take their origin from a
   particular turn or habit of the imagination_                       41

 CHAP. III. _Of the unsocial passions_                                46

 CHAP. IV. _Of the social passions_                                   54

 CHAP. V. _Of the selfish passions_                                   58

                              SECTION III.

 Of the effects of prosperity and adversity upon the judgment of
   mankind with regard to the propriety of action; and why it is
   more easy to obtain their approbation in the one state than in
   the other                                                          64

 CHAP. I. _That though our sympathy with sorrow is generally a
   more lively sensation than our sympathy with joy, it commonly
   falls much more short of the violence of what is naturally felt
   by the person principally concerned_                            ibid.

 CHAP. II. _Of the origin of ambition, and of the distinction of
   ranks_                                                             74

 CHAP. III. _Of the stoical philosophy_                               89

                                PART II.

    Of Merit and Demerit; or of the objects of reward and punishment.

                               SECTION I.

 Of the sense of merit and demerit                                    97

 CHAP. I. _That whatever appears to be the proper object of
   gratitude, appears to deserve reward; and that, in the same
   manner, whatever appears to be the proper object of resentment,
   appears to deserve punishment_                                     98

 CHAP. II. _Of the proper objects of gratitude and resentment_       102

 CHAP. III. _That where there is no approbation of the conduct of
   the person who confers the benefit, there is little sympathy
   with the gratitude of him who receives it: and that, on the
   contrary, where there is no disapprobation of the motives of
   the person who does the mischief, there is no sort of sympathy
   with the resentment of him who suffers it_                        106

 CHAP. IV. _Recapitulation of the foregoing chapters_                109

 CHAP. V. _The analysis of the sense of merit and demerit_           112

                               SECTION II.

 Of justice and beneficence                                          119

 CHAP. I. _Comparison of those two virtues_                        ibid.

 CHAP. II. _Of the sense of justice, of remorse, and of the
   consciousness of merit_                                           126

 CHAP. III. _Of the utility of this constitution of nature_          132

                              SECTION III.

 Of the influence of fortune upon the sentiments of mankind, with
   regard to the merit or demerit of actions                         145

 CHAP. I. _Of the causes of this influence of fortune_               148

 CHAP. II. _Of the extent of this influence of fortune_              154

 CHAP. III. _Of the final cause of this irregularity of
   sentiments_                                                       167

                                PART III.

  Of the foundation of our judgments concerning our own sentiments and
                   conduct, and of the sense of duty.

 CHAP. I. _Of the consciousness of merited praise or blame_          173

 CHAP. II. _In what manner our own judgments refer to what ought
   to be the judgments of others: and of the origin of general
   rules_                                                            180

 CHAP. III. _Of the influence and authority of the general rules
   of morality, and that they are justly regarded as the laws of
   the Deity_                                                        207

 CHAP. IV. _In what cases the sense of duty ought to be the sole
   principle of our conduct; and in what cases it ought to concur
   with other motives_                                               223

                                PART IV.

      Of the effect of utility upon the sentiments of approbation.

 CHAP. I. _Of the beauty which the appearance of Utility bestows
   upon all the productions of art, and of the extensive influence
   of this species of beauty_                                        237

 CHAP. II. _Of the beauty which the appearance of utility bestows
   upon the characters and actions of men; and how far the
   perception of this beauty may be regarded as one of the
   original principles of approbation_                               250

                                 PART V.

   Of the influence of custom and fashion upon the sentiments of moral
                     approbation and disapprobation.

 CHAP. I. _Of the influence of custom and fashion upon our notions
   of beauty and deformity_                                          261

 CHAP. II. _Of the influence of custom and fashion upon moral
   sentiments_                                                       271

                                PART VI.

                     Of Systems of Moral Philosophy.

                               SECTION I.

 Of the questions which ought to be examined in a theory of moral
   sentiments                                                        291

                               SECTION II.

 Of the different accounts which have been given of the nature of
   virtue                                                            294

 CHAP. I. _Of those systems which make virtue consist in
   propriety_                                                        295

 CHAP. II. _Of those systems which make virtue consist in
   prudence_                                                         311

 CHAP. III. _Of those systems which make virtue consist in
   benevolence_                                                      321

 CHAP. IV. _Of licentious systems_                                   331

                              SECTION III.

 Of the different systems which have been formed concerning the
   principle of approbation                                          345

 CHAP. I. _Of those systems which deduce the principle of
   approbation from self-love_                                       346

 CHAP. II. _Of those systems which make reason the principle of
   approbation_                                                      350

 CHAP. III. _Of those systems which make sentiment the principle
   of approbation_                                                   356

                               SECTION IV.

 Of the manner in which different authors have treated of the
   practical rules of morality                                       367

 _Considerations concerning the first formation of languages, and
   the different genius of original and compound languages_          389

                                PART I.
                      Of the PROPRIETY of ACTION.

                     Consisting of three Sections.

                               SECTION I.
                       Of the SENSE of PROPRIETY.

                                CHAP. I.
                             _Of_ SYMPATHY.

How selfish soever man may be supposed, there are evidently some
principles in his nature, which interest him in the fortune of others,
and render their happiness necessary to him, though he derives nothing
from it, except the pleasure of seeing it. Of this kind is pity or
compassion, the emotion which we feel for the misery of others, when we
either see it, or are made to conceive it in a very lively manner. That
we often derive sorrow from the sorrow of others, is a matter of fact
too obvious to require any instances to prove it; for this sentiment,
like all the other original passions of human nature, is by no means
confined to the virtuous and humane, though they perhaps may feel it
with the most exquisite sensibility. The greatest ruffian, the most
hardened violator of the laws of society, is not altogether without it.

As we have no immediate experience of what other men feel, we can form
no idea of the manner in which they are affected, but by conceiving what
we ourselves should feel in the like situation. Though our brother is
upon the rack, as long as we ourselves are at our ease, our senses will
never inform us of what he suffers. They never did and never can carry
us beyond our own person, and it is by the imagination only that we can
form any conception of what are his sensations. Neither can that faculty
help us to this any other way, than by representing to us what would be
our own, if we were in his case. It is the impressions of our own senses
only, not those of his, which our imaginations copy. By the imagination
we place ourselves in his situation, we conceive ourselves enduring all
the same torments, we enter as it were into his body and become in some
measure him, and thence form some idea of his sensations and even feel
something which, though weaker in degree, is not altogether unlike them.
His agonies, when they are thus brought home to ourselves, when we have
thus adopted and made them our own, begin at last to affect us, and we
then tremble and shudder at the thought of what he feels. For as to be
in pain or distress of any kind excites the most excessive sorrow, so to
conceive or to imagine that we are in it, excites some degree of the
same emotion, in proportion to the vivacity or dullness of the
conception.

That this is the source of our fellow-feeling for the misery of others,
that it is by changing places in fancy with the sufferer, that we come
either to conceive or to be affected by what he feels, may be
demonstrated by many obvious observations, if it should not be thought
sufficiently evident of itself. When we see a stroke aimed and just
ready to fall upon the leg or arm of another person, we naturally shrink
and draw back our own leg or our own arm; and when it does fall, we feel
it in some measure, and are hurt by it as well as the sufferer. The mob,
when they are gazing at a dancer on the slack rope, naturally writhe and
twist and balance their own bodies, as they see him do, and as they feel
that they themselves must do if in his situation. Persons of delicate
fibres and a weak constitution of body, complain that in looking on the
sores and ulcers which are exposed by beggars in the streets, they are
apt to feel an itching or uneasy sensation in the correspondent part of
their own bodies. The horror which they conceive at the misery of those
wretches affects that particular part in themselves more than any other;
because that horror arises from conceiving what they themselves would
suffer, if they really were the wretches whom they are looking upon, and
if that particular part in themselves was actually affected in the same
miserable manner. The very force of this conception is sufficient, in
their feeble frames, to produce that itching or uneasy sensation
complained of. Men of the most robust make, observe that in looking upon
sore eyes they often feel a very sensible soreness in their own, which
proceeds from the same reason; that organ being in the strongest man
more delicate than any other part of the body is in the weakest.

Neither is it those circumstances only, which create pain or sorrow,
that call forth our fellow-feeling. Whatever is the passion which arises
from any object in the person principally concerned, an analogous
emotion springs up, at the thought of his situation, in the breast of
every attentive spectator. Our joy for the deliverance of those heroes
of tragedy or romance who interest us, is as sincere as our grief for
their distress, and our fellow-feeling with their misery is not more
real than that with their happiness. We enter into their gratitude
towards those faithful friends who did not desert them in their
difficulties; and we heartily go along with their resentment against
those perfidious traitors who injured, abandoned, or deceived them. In
every passion of which the mind of man is susceptible, the emotions of
the by-stander always correspond to what, by bringing the case home to
himself, he imagines, should be the sentiments of the sufferer.

Pity and compassion are words appropriated to signify our fellow-feeling
with the sorrow of others. Sympathy, though its meaning was, perhaps,
originally the same, may now, however, without much impropriety, be made
use of to denote our fellow-feeling with any passion whatever.

Upon some occasions sympathy may seem to arise merely from the view of a
certain emotion in another person. The passions, upon some occasions,
may seem to be transfused from one man to another, instantaneously, and
antecedent to any knowledge of what excited them in the person
principally concerned. Grief and joy, for example, strongly expressed in
the look and gestures of
