---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

A knowledge of the subject matter of Volume I is a prerequisite to the
profitable study of the present work. Therefore, it may be well to
review briefly the contents of the latter as an introduction to this
book. In Volume I the attempt was made to formulate and illustrate
the basic principles upon which the practice of accounting is
founded. The principles of debit and credit were developed and their
application explained—as related ultimately to the balance sheet and
statement of profit and loss. The chief books of original entry (the
voucher register excepted) and the various ledgers were described and
illustrated. Columnar books, controlling accounts, methods and devices
for preventing and detecting errors, methods for the proper handling
of purchases, sales, cash, and trade discounts, and some phases of
proportion and interest were discussed in detail.

Some special applications of accounting principles, as viewed in
relation to the accounting problems involved therein, were also
explained and illustrated under such heads as: notes receivable
discounted and dishonored; consignments and approval sales; single and
joint venture accounts; accounts current, their reconciliation and
adjustment; instalment sales; sales for future delivery; single entry,
its methods and the results attainable under it; etc.

From the standpoint of business organization, the accounting problems
peculiar to the single proprietorship and the partnership were given
full treatment. The advantages and disadvantages of the various types
of organization, the rights and duties of owners among themselves
and to outsiders, the accounting procedure necessary under different
conditions for changing from one form of organization to another, and
other like items were set forth. Underlying the entire treatment of
the subject was the guiding principle that accounting is never an end
in itself, that its right to existence depends solely on the service
it can render from the standpoint of administrative and financial
management.

In content, the present volume is primarily a study of the corporation,
its accounting and financial problems, although most of the material,
in so far as it consists of a statement of general principles, is
equally applicable to other types of organization. The emphasis of the
volume is laid upon the problem of valuation as met in the commercial
balance sheet. Chapters IV to XXVII inclusive comprise this portion of
the subject matter. The other chapters treat miscellaneous matters, a
knowledge of which is essential to the student of accounting. These
latter form parts of the work of the second year as mapped out in the
author’s scheme of instruction, whereby the whole field of accounting
is covered by a well-graded three-year course of study. In this scheme
cost accounting should be studied concurrently and as a parallel course
with the work of this second volume. Only a bare outline of some of the
problems and methods of cost accounting is presented in this volume.

As to the division of the text and its use in the general scheme, it is
suggested that the first twenty-seven chapters should comprise the text
material for the first semester, leaving the remainder for the second
semester in which the chief emphasis should be placed on the solution
of problems rather than on the formal classroom lecture. Hence the text
material is lessened for this semester’s work, and the student’s main
effort is directed towards the application to the problems of business
of the principles already established.

Instead of following the plan of the first volume in placing the
practice work for the student at the end of each chapter of text, this
material is presented separately in three appendices. It is believed
that this will be found a more convenient arrangement.

The author desires to emphasize the need of ample practice work and at
the same time to take a stand against the method of teaching accounting
exclusively by the so-called laboratory or case method. A happy
combination of text containing a statement of principles and showing
methods of application, together with practice material intelligently
made up so as to require a knowledge of principles before solution,
is the desideratum in any course of instruction. Principles, theory,
without application are barren and soon slip away, even if seemingly
understood at the time. Practice without a thorough grounding in
fundamental theory can never be sure of itself. An equitable division
of the student’s time between theory and practice portions should
be aimed at. In the present volume, while the time required for the
practice assignments may at times seem heavy, an attempt has been made
to keep it to the minimum deemed essential for adequate training either
for general or professional use. It cannot be too emphatically stated
that accounting as a profession ranks as to subject matter and the need
for its services with the other professions. If it is to enjoy equal
honor, dignity, and professional standing, teachers and practitioners
must condemn without qualification the idea prevalent among many that
a few months’ training suffices to turn out a finished product. Too
often has such a course given point to the witticism that an accountant
is a bookkeeper without a job. As stated in the preface of Volume I,
a course of at least three years’ _professional_ study is now quite
generally recognized as essential. Accounting is so broad in its many
ramifications that less than that gives inadequate training.

The reception accorded the first volume and the report of results
achieved in the classroom, through its use leads the author to hope
that this second volume may have a courteous hearing and trial.
Criticisms and suggestions will be much appreciated. The author
hopes to be able to offer in the not too remote future the third and
concluding volume in this series on general accounting.

The author is indebted for much assistance and counsel. Acknowledgment
is due Miss Nina Miller of the Columbia staff and Eric Bodine for help
in gathering and preparing much of the material for Chapters XXVIII to
XXXIII; to H. A. Inghram of the University of Georgia, for preparation
of a large part of Appendix D; to Leo Greendlinger and David E. Boyce
for the use of problems prepared by them; and to his good friend,
Joseph Gill, for help in reading the proof. To S. B. Koopman and James
F. Hughes of the Columbia staff in second year accounting, the author
is under special obligation for many suggestions. Mr. Koopman has
furnished most of the problems for Appendix B, and has collected those
for Appendix C.

As with Volume I, so in shaping the content of the present volume the
author has had the good counsel and ever ready help of his chief,
Robert H. Montgomery, and desires again to offer goodly acknowledgment,
for his debt is large.

                                            R. B. KESTER.
    Columbia University,
        New York City, August 5, 1918.

CONTENTS

    CHAPTER                                                       PAGE
          I  THE CORPORATION                                        1
              The Corporation
              Classification and Definitions
              Method of Ownership
              Working Organization
              Different Classes of Stock
              Common Stock
              Preferred Stock
              Guaranteed Stock
              Founders’ Stock
              Debenture Stock
              Stock of No Par Value
              Watered Stock
              Treasury Stock
              Forfeited Stock
              Bonus Stocks or Bonds

                  ACCOUNTING FOR STOCKS
              Discount on Stock
              Premium on Stock
              Property Exchanged for Stock
              Treasury Stock Donated
              Bonus Stock
              Treasury Stock Purchased
              Redemption of Preferred Stock
              Forfeited Stock
              Stock of No Par Value
              Distinctive Records
              Stock Ledger
              Minute Book
              Conclusion

         II  THE VOUCHER SYSTEM                                    26
              Purchasing for the Manufacturing Business
              Expansion of the Purchase Journal
              Development of Voucher System
              Definition and Description of Voucher
              Operation of Voucher System
              Voucher Check
              Form of Voucher Register
              Distribution of Vouchers
              Posting of Summary Totals
              Effect on Cash Book and Bank Account
              Payment of Vouchers
              Voucher Index of Creditors
              Control of Vouchers Payable
              Introduction of System
              Purchase Returns and Allowances
              Partial Payments
              Handling of Notes Payable
              Cash Discount on Purchases
              Modifications of System
              Summary of Operation and Advantages

        III  FACTORY COSTS                                         49
              Difference Between Factory and Financial Accounting
              Definitions of Terms
              Special Purposes of Cost Records
              Nature of Raw Materials and Supplies
              Accounting for Material Cost
              Direct and Indirect Labor
              Time-Keeping Records
              Pay-Roll
              Safeguarding the Pay-Roll
              Distribution of Labor Charges
              Expense
              Summary of Manufacturing Cost

         IV  THE BALANCE SHEET                                     60
              Business Methods under the Microscope
              The Reading of the Balance Sheet
              Definition
              Relation Between Balance Sheet and Trial Balance
              Form of Balance Sheet
              Purpose and Uses
              Types of Balance Sheet
              Origin of English Form of Balance Sheet
              Variation of English Form
              Balance Sheet Titles
              Grouping and Classification
              Arrangement of Groups
              Report and Account Forms
              Valuation Accounts
              Statutory Requirements as to Frequency of
                  Balance Sheets
              Condensation of Information in the Balance Sheet
              Use of Supporting Schedules

          V  GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF VALUATION                       81
              Content of the Balance Sheet
              Valuations for Rate Regulation
              Valuation for Sale and Purchase
              Other Kinds of Valuations
              Going Concern Valuation
              Kinds of Value
              Source of Data as to Values
              Cost Value the Usual Basis
              Definition of Capital and Revenue Expenditures
              Organization Expenses
              Definition of Replacements, Renewals,
                      Maintenance, etc.
              Treatment of Renewal of Parts
              Treatment of Cost-Cutting Changes
              Asset Subject to Depreciation a Deferred Charge
                      to Operations
              Authorization of Booking Capital Expenditures
              Repairs on Second-Hand Plant
              Construction Costs
              Distinction Between Capital and Revenue Expenditures
                      Often Based on Opinion
              Main Groups of Asset Items
              Valuation of Liability Items
              Over- and Under-Valuation
              The Balance Sheet an Expression of Opinion

         VI  DEPRECIATION—ASPECTS AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS         99
              Aspects of Depreciation
              Definitions
              Authoritative Opinions
              Why the Depreciation Factor Arises
              Actual or Absolute Depreciation
              Theoretical Depreciation
              Comparison of Actual and Theoretical Depreciation
              “Accounting” and “Fair” Depreciation
              Complete and Incomplete Depreciation
              Individual and Composite Depreciation
              Physical and Functional Depreciation
              Deferred Maintenance and Accrued Depreciation
              Attitude of the Law
              Decision of Supreme Court
              Recognition of the Depreciation Factor
              Distinction Between Repairs and Renewals
              Depreciation and Plant Efficiency
              Unit Efficiency
              Depreciation and Fluctuations in Market Value
              Distinction Between Depreciation and Depletion
              Effect on Different Kinds of Business

        VII  DEPRECIATION—ITS CAUSES                              120
              Analysis of Causes
              Age as a Cause of Depreciation
              Wear and Tear of Use
              Functional Depreciation
              Inadequacy as a Factor
              Inadequacy Through Change of Policy
              Inadequacy Through Motives of Economy
              Inadequacy Due to Unforeseen Development
              Inadequacy Imposed from Without
              Obsolescence as a Cause
              Treatment of Obsolescence
              Contingent Depreciation
              Terminable Rights
              Effective Depreciation

       VIII  DEPRECIATION—FACTORS OF RATE DETERMINATION           136
              Fundamental Purpose of Depreciation
              Depreciation a Cost of Operation
              Complication of Short Fiscal Periods
              The Factor of Idle Time
              Depreciation a Means of Financing
              Danger of the Financing Viewpoint
              The Standardization of Depreciation Rates
