---
tags: [economics, macro, finance]
---

The stock market literature of the past thirty years would make a vast
library in itself--one that would provide reading for a lifetime.
Perhaps there is no other subject, apart from the eternal topic of
love, in which more people are vitally concerned, either directly
or indirectly. Since most of the country’s wealth and commerce is
controlled by corporations whose securities are listed on the various
stock exchanges, the price fluctuations, which often reach the daily
aggregate of hundreds of millions of dollars, either in loss or
enhancement of value, are necessarily a matter of general concern.
In 1925 the stock transactions on the New York Stock Exchange alone
amounted to the stupendous and unprecedented total of well over
452,000,000 shares, while the sales of listed bonds totaled more than
$3,398,000,000. These figures, of course, do not include the unknown
billions of dollars worth of securities bought and sold on a dozen or
more other exchanges and through private channels.

[Illustration]

In addition to the large daily grist of “Market Opinions,” many books
and pamphlets are written which purport to be “Guides to Traders,”
or up-to-date recipes for “Beating Wall Street.” They set forth an
exhaustive array of statistics, instructions and warnings; they
furnish elaborately charted plans indicating many of the pitfalls of
speculation; they tell how to avoid these, how to buy, what to buy,
when to buy and how to make money; but while the theories advanced are
oftentimes sound and easily comprehended, very few people profit by
them, because when once caught in the maelstrom of stock speculation
the average man becomes more or less mesmerized, and at critical
moments his conservatism, his resolutions and his theories all take
flight. Under the discomposing influence of a rapid succession of
changing values and alternating impulses he loses his perspective, is
incapable of calm reasoning, and is likely to do precisely the opposite
of what he had intended doing. Like a piece of driftwood in a swirling
stream, his actions are controlled less by personal instigation than
by the currents about him. Therefore to write, however intelligently,
or to read, however studiously, about how to make money in the stock
market is largely wasted effort in imparting, also in acquiring,
information that does not adequately inform. Not that the instructor’s
premises are faulty, or that the reader is deficient in understanding;
but that the difficulties which necessarily attend the application of
the scheme of operations subsisting in the mind of the author are so
perplexing and disconcerting that the disciple becomes incapable of
adhering to sound basic principles. And it must be perfectly obvious
to anyone that even the teacher himself is not a master, but merely
an expounder, of his own principles; for otherwise he would be a
capitalist instead of a professional scribbler. Notwithstanding the
many excellent books which have been written on the subject, the real
secret of stock market success still remains (and probably always will
remain) locked up in the bosoms of a few who are too busy to write, and
too rich to feel the need of writing.

THE PERNICIOUS INFLUENCE OF THE STOCK TICKER

The individual who trades or invests in stocks will do well to keep
away from the stock ticker; for the victim of “tickeritis” is no more
capable of reasonable and self-composed action than one who is in the
delirium of typhoid fever. The gyroscopic action of the prices recorded
on the ticker-tape produces a sort of mental intoxication, which
foreshortens the vision by involuntary submissiveness to momentary
influences. It also produces on some minds an effect somewhat similar
to that which one feels after standing for a considerable time intently
watching the water as it flows over Niagara Falls. Dozens of people,
without any suicidal intentions, have been drawn into this current and
dashed on the rocks below. And thousands daily are influenced by the
stock ticker to commit the most fatuous blunders.

[Illustration]

As a camera fails to record a true picture if placed in too close
juxtaposition to the object, so in studying the ticker-tape one is
restricted to a close-up view of conditions, resulting in a distorted
gauge of values; for the figures recorded often mislead and confuse
the attentive observer; in fact it frequently happens that the
price fluctuations result from a wave of hysteria among a coterie
of traders, and bear but little analogy to the true value of the
stocks. To illustrate this point more explicitly, the stock of almost
any conservatively capitalized and well managed concern paying six
dollars annually in dividends has an investment value of from $85 to
$100 a share; but in the ups and downs of the market the stock gets
buffeted about on the exchange in obedience to the varying sentiments
of traders, sometimes selling as low as $50, and at other times as
high as $150, without any change whatever in the company’s earnings,
its prospects, or its management. (These matters will be dealt with a
little farther on, and exemplified by showing their effects upon the
mentalities of various types of speculators.) It does not follow that
one who keeps in touch with the stock market by telephone, or through
the daily papers, will find his path free from thorns and snares; but
he will at least have a more open perspective than one who submits to
the influence of the ticker.

Any intelligent trader may reason out exactly what he ought to do under
certain specific conditions; but in the quickly shifting and uncertain
process of determining values he loses his mental poise; and experience
proves that anyone whose reasoning faculties become confounded is apt
to be affected by some form of hysteria, and will frequently do the
opposite of what he would do under normal conditions.

The most copious and the most unreliable financial writers are the
market “tipsters” who write daily letters of advice to an army of
subscribers, and claim to have more or less positive knowledge of
what certain stocks or groups of stocks are going to do marketwise.
They often profess to have definite “inside information,” which any
subscriber may receive at a stated price, ranging anywhere from $10
a month upward. These false financial prophets, who lead a horde of
blind followers, should not be confused with reputable bureaus and
statistical experts who base their opinions and their advice to clients
upon a logical analysis of general conditions.

[Illustration]

Henry Fielding wrote a whole essay to prove that a man can write
more informingly on topics of which he has some knowledge than on
matters that he knows nothing about. He believed also that mankind
is more agreeably entertained by example than by precept; therefore
it is not the purpose of this discourse to teach anybody anything,
unless perchance something may be gained by example or suggestion.
There are four subjects on which advice, however good, is generally
wasted,--politics, stock speculation, religion, and love; for in these
matters grown-ups rarely follow the advice of others, and when they do,
if they profit by it they take all the credit to themselves, whereas if
they lose they always blame the adviser. Such are the inexorable and
universal laws of human nature.

Anyone may relate his own stock market experiences, or those of
others--perhaps to the surprise or enlightenment of his audience. He
may even venture his opinions on the subject; but for anybody to assume
that he can continuously operate an unfailing system of making money
on stock or grain exchanges would be equivalent to asserting that he
could invert the fundamental laws of psychology, or that he could beat
the game at Monte Carlo by scientific methods. Many have tried both, to
their sorrow.

And still, hundreds of thousands of people continue to play at gambling
tables, and hundreds of thousands speculate in stocks. There are many
persons who gamble moderately all their lives, just as some drink
moderately all their lives, with no resultant harm; while with others
both of these inhibited practices become fixed and ruinous vices. Since
trading in stocks has the appearance of being an easy way of making
money, it is one of the most alluring pursuits of modern times; and
from this very fact, although legalized for all, it is susceptible
of becoming one of the most dangerous habits known. It is dangerous
for the confirmed addict not only because he is apt to lose, but for
the reason that it distracts his attention from business in daytime
and frequently destroys his rest at night. But as it would be folly to
advise people not to embark in commercial pursuits because statistics
show that upwards of ninety per cent. of business ventures result in
failure, so it would be useless to caution people not to trade in
stocks because it is a hazardous undertaking in which a peculiar sort
of sagacity and self-control are the only safeguards against certain
disaster.

Most people of sturdy mentality are unwilling to admit that they could
be made easy subjects of hypnotic influences, and would scout the idea
that mere business transactions in securities could effect any undue
subversion of their equipoise. The average human mind is, however,
incapable of maintaining its equilibrium under the strain of great
excitement; and no amount of knowledge, either inherent or acquired,
no amount of experience, however dearly bought, will enable one
always to think intelligently or act wisely under highly nerve-racking
conditions. It is said that persons who become disoriented in a forest
will almost invariably go in the wrong direction (I have done so myself
on two different occasions); and that in an effort to salvage goods
from a burning house they will throw mirrors and other fragile articles
out a third-story window and carry pillows downstairs.

THE DISCONCERTING EFFECT OF SUDDEN LOSSES AND GAINS

There are but few things more unbalancing to the mind than the act
of suddenly winning or losing large sums of money. A few years ago
at Monte Carlo I was in company with a friend, a well known man of
affairs who while there played at roulette nearly every day, merely as
a pastime. He was of mature age, naturally methodical, conservative,
temperate and cool-headed. He made it an unalterable rule to limit
his losses to $200 at any one sitting, and on losing this amount he
always stopped playing. His bets were usually limited to two dollars
on the numbers, and never doubled except for one turn of the wheel
when his number won. He generally played three numbers at a time; never
more than four. For ten consecutive sittings luck was against him and
each time he had lost his stake of $200. I saw him get up and leave
the room, apparently in a state of disgust. An hour or so later I
discovered him at a roulette table in another room stacking his chips
in piles on a dozen or more numbers. Now and again when he exceeded the
limit the watchful croupier reduced his bets and pushed a few disks
back to him. In addition to betting on the numbers he was staking a
thousand franc note on one of the three columns, another thousand on
the colors, and a like amount on the center dozen. In one run he lost
seventeen consecutive bets on red, of a thousand francs each. His eyes
were bloodshot, his fingers twitched, and plainly he was under the
strain of great agitation. He continued to play for three hours or so,
when all of a sudden he got up, stood for a moment looking dazedly
about, then left the table. He afterwards told me that he lost twenty
thousand dollars; and that he hadn’t the slightest recollection of
anything that happened during the play, nor did he realize the amount
he was betting. In this connection, it is a fact not generally known,
that many rich men sign printed cards of instructions to the proprietor
of a certain well known gambling club in the South, directing him
to stop their play and refuse them further credit beyond a certain
specified sum on any one day or evening of play, and refusing to become
responsible beyond that amount. If men who trade in the stock market
were to impose like restrictions upon their transactions the losses
would in many cases be greatly minimized.

RETIRED BUSINESS MEN IN THE STOCK MARKET

Retired business men suffering from _ennui_, have often had recourse to
the stock market as a means of stimulating their emotions and expanding
their fortunes; with the result, in the first of these purposes they
have usually succeeded beyond their expectations, while in the second
they have met with uncharted obstacles. Some years ago when many of
the great trusts were in process of formation a well known Pittsburgh
magnate sold out his business to the United States Steel Corporation
and later bought a home in New York and turned his attention to
stock speculation. After plunging into a boiling market and buying
thousands of shares at top prices, the trend eventually changed and he
found himself on the crest of a tobogganing market with more than a
hund
